Shock report shows North pupils performing below national 
    average

THE education system is failing hundreds of Highland children, a 
    shocking new report has revealed.
Figures released by the Scottish Government show youngsters in 
    the region are performing poorly in reading, writing, numeracy, 
    listening and talking, compared to the national average.
Although far from the worst local authority in the country, 
    Highland was lower than the Scottish benchmark in all categories, 
    at all ages. This is the first time information has been available 
    at this level of detail and shows the percentage of children 
    meeting expected curriculum for excellence targets based on teacher 
    judgements. The figures are broken down into primaries one, four 
    and seven as well as the third year of secondary school, which was 
    broken into two categories, ‘third level or better’ or ‘fourth 
    level’.
In Highland 73 per cent of primary one pupils were meeting their 
    expected reading level, compared to a national average of 81 per 
    cent.
By third year, only 32 per cent reached fourth level, compared 
    to 39 per cent across Scotland.
The writing achievements paint the same picture, as the figure 
    for P1s in the Highlands is 10 per cent lower than the national 
    average of 78 per cent but the gap almost closes in high school 
    with 45 per cent reaching the level four target, only slightly 
    below 49 per cent in Scotland.
Listening and talking was the area north pupils scored best on, 
    at 82 per cent in P1, just three per cent lower than the national 
    average but this dropped to 33 per cent by third year, compared to 
    41 per cent in Scotland overall.
In numeracy more than three quarters (77 per cent) of P1s in the 
    Highlands achieved the target but this was still lower then 84 per 
    cent across Scotland. Almost half (45 per cent) met the final 
    target, only slightly lower than the Scottish figure of 49 per 
    cent.
Drew Millar, chairman of Highland Council’s education, care and 
    adult services (ECAS) committee, was unfazed by the report, saying 
    national average do not reflect the number of remote and rural 
    schools in the region.
"I think the thing to be aware of is the fact this 
    is new and experimental," he said.
"The only benchmark we have is against the national 
    average and Highland is so different, we have composite classes and 
    schools with pupils travelling long distances to attend.
"Also, the targets are assessed by teachers but who 
    is to say how a teacher in Highland assesses a pupil is the same as 
    a teacher in Edinburgh? "There is still a lot we don’t know 
    and we need a more appropriate benchmark.
"Overall we think our standard of education in the 
    Highlands is very high and I think our figures are very 
    positive."
And Alistair Bell, Highland spokesman for teaching union EIS 
    Highland agreed, saying teachers work hard to provide a high 
    standard of education.
"There’s a lot of variance in the Highlands but in 
    most cases pupils are meeting their expected levels," 
    he added.
"We have a high proportion of composite classes 
    which adds extra work to teachers but they go over and above to 
    help their pupils.
"Teachers are numbers are also down which doesn’t 
    help. I hope that can be resolved soon because all of our teaching 
    staff work incredibly hard."
The Scottish Government has said these figures will help to 
    identify ways to close the gap between pupils performing well and 
    poorly but Alasdair Christie, a member of the council’s ECAS 
    committee, blamed Holyrood’s for imposing national "one size 
    fits all" rules on the Highlands, as well as plans to increase 
    council tax for a national education fund.
"The centralisation of council tax is 
    unacceptable," he said.
"The way to help education is to allow us to provide 
    resources where they are needed, not take away our 
    control.
"What we can and can’t do for education is hindered 
    by the Scottish Government by their national rules but one size 
    does not fit all.
"In Highland we have a mix of rural schools, 
    composite classes and urban deprivation unlike anywhere 
    else.
"What works in the central belt does not work 
    here."
Earlier this year the Scottish Government announced plans to 
    increase council tax on high-value properties. the money earned 
    will be pulled into a national pot and distributed to schools with 
    the greatest need. This sparked fears Highland could lose money to 
    areas in the central belt with higher levels of deprivation.
But deputy first minister and education secretary John Swinney 
    said the government will free up schools to make more decisions, 
    not less.
"This government is already taking action and 
    implementing radical reforms to strengthen our education system and 
    raise attainment for all," he said. 
"Our £750 million attainment programme to close the 
    gap for our pupils from the most deprived areas is already having a 
    tangible impact, not least by directly funding 160 full time 
    equivalent teachers. 
"We are strengthening school leadership and, through 
    the governance review, empowering schools to take the decisions 
    necessary to improve children’s attainment. I am also freeing 
    teachers to teach through my drive to simplify and clarify the 
    curriculum.
"The collaboration in our education system is one of 
    its great strengths and it is essential we all work together to 
    deliver the improvements required to make Scotland’s education 
    world class."
