The parent trap: Are we letting our kids become less 
    active?

AS obesity rates climb in Scotland, our rising waistlines also 
    bring with them a rise in medical conditions such as heart disease 
    and Type 2 diabetes. To put an end to this, it’s up to all of us to 
    educate and ultimately train our future generations out of this 
    epidemic.
In modern life we are pre-disposed to being less active as we 
    are spending more and more time sitting down. While we sit we use 
    around one calorie per minute. During exercise we can see this rise 
    to around 20 calories per minute and during intense exercise 
    30-plus calories per minute. Further, when we are sitting around 
    watching TV, playing video games, or using our tablets, our muscles 
    will use around 20 per cent of our energy. During exercise this 
    will soar up to around 80 to 90 per cent. But what does this really 
    mean?
If your child eats a 200-calorie oat bar for example, then sits 
    on the sofa using his or her tablet it would take them 198 minutes 
    to burn the calories eaten. Now if that’s washed down by a glass of 
    fruit juice or soda, the time can be doubled or tripled. Add in a 
    few meals, some more snacks and we will soon see that calories in 
    will be far greater than calories out.
Now, I’m not advocating that we should count our children’s 
    calories – I don’t even count my own. I am simply highlighting how 
    easy it can be to let children fall into a “sedentary” state. In 
    school they will already spend six hours sitting down, more at 
    mealtimes, and journeying to and from school unless they are 
    walking. In total your child can be looking at eight hours with 
    very little physical stimulus.
The situation is worse for girls whose activity levels are up to 
    30 per cent less than boys, with only one in three being physically 
    active for an hour or more a day. I will cast aside the gender 
    stereotype that boys are playing football while girls are playing 
    with dolls for one second and say that even if this was the case we 
    are still looking at an overall drop in activity levels mostly due 
    to modern living.
The importance of sports, martial arts, fitness classes for 
    kids, hillwalking or climbing has never been greater. If our 
    children are not introduced to new physical activities they will 
    miss out not only on the physical development that comes with 
    exercise but the mental stimulation and interactions that occur 
    when they meet new people, form new relationships, learn new skills 
    and responsibilities.
Speaking with Martin McCann, the children’s coach here at 
    Everyday Athlete about these trends was illuminating. Martin 
    explained that his classes see around 70 per cent male attendance 
    from children aged 4-13. This is a direct representation of the 
    statistic mentioned. The parents of the children involved in 
    regular exercise all commented on how much better behaved they were 
    as well as showing an increased focus on their school studies.
Martin added that in his experience, when coaching children 
    there is little point in telling them they must exercise in order 
    to stay healthy. The concept of future heart, bone or weight 
    problems holds little value to your average primary school child. 
    Instead he told me how praising the efforts in training and telling 
    them how it will make them stronger, fitter or faster for things 
    like school sports day has a greater effect.
The focus therefore must be turned to finding something physical 
    that kids enjoy. It then becomes easier to make a positive 
    connection with the benefits associated. One of our children here 
    at the gym is barely 10 years old and already has mastered 
    pull-ups. This is the same type of skill transfer gained by 
    climbing trees or ropes, a natural activity children have done for 
    millennia but, due to tablets, video games and online lifestyle, 
    one that we are slowly losing out on. If children form a positive 
    rewarding relationship with exercise it will no doubt accompany 
    them into adulthood and in return be passed to their own 
    children.
There are some fundamental movements that should be encouraged 
    and maintained as a child grows. These include squatting, push-ups, 
    planks, bear crawls and any type of climbing movements.
Here are some fun ways to get your child working out at home 
    without even knowing it.
Children love a challenge, one thing that has stayed with me 
    from when I was younger is this phrase “I’ll time you”. What was a 
    simple and effective way to get rid of my younger sister for 30 
    seconds at a time we now use to encourage kids to move with added 
    intensity. Pick a distance, tell them you will time them to run or 
    crawl to it and back. Repeat this and attempt to beat your score. 
    How many squats can you do in 30 seconds? A squat-hold challenge? 
    The list is endless.
Tig: An age-old classic that stands the test of time. No 
    equipment is required and it is sure to build reflexes and 
    speed.
Skipping: Ropes cost as little as £3 and are hard wearing as 
    well as a great workout for building hand, foot and eye 
    co-ordination. You can also add in a reward element. When you can 
    do 100 unbroken rotations, for example.
