Scotland contact Childline about suicide in a year 
    
 Report reveals record level of calls 
    from children
Childline carried out more than 900 suicide 
    counselling sessions involving children from Scotland last year as 
    the helpline dealt with record levels of calls on the 
    issue. 
Across the UK, the round-the-clock service delivered record 
    levels of counselling sessions on suicide between April 2015 and 
    March 2016 with 19,481 contacts from young people who were plagued 
    with thoughts of ending their own lives – an average of 53 sessions 
    every day and more than double the number five years ago.
A total of 934 calls and online enquiries were received from 
    children in Scotland – an average of almost 18 a week.
Girls were six times more likely to contact Childline about 
    suicidal thoughts and feelings than boys and those at most risk 
    were aged between 12 and 15.
Children tended to feel more desperate in the winter months with 
    a third calling Childline counsellors at night, according to the 
    service’s annual report ‘It Turned Out Someone Did Care’ published 
    recently. Many of the calls dealt with by counsellors had to be 
    referred to emergency services.
Turbulent home life, abuse, school pressures, and mental health 
    conditions were all major triggers for suicidal thoughts, with 
    children as young as ten telling the NSPCC’s service how desperate 
    they were.
There was a significant rise in the number of young people who 
    spoke about their mental health, with a third of counselling 
    sessions concentrating on the issue. It is well documented that 
    abuse can trigger serious mental health issues.
Many were singlehandedly dealing with problems as counsellors 
    across the UK saw an 87 per cent increase in young people 
    struggling to access professional help predominantly for mental 
    health services, blaming lengthy waiting lists, lack of information 
    or refusal of help.
The chronic shortage of support is forcing many children to wait 
    until they reach crisis point when they feel the only place they 
    can turn to is Childline.
The NSPCC’s It’s Time campaign is demanding governments across 
    the UK invest in services – such as easily accessible professional 
    care - to ensure all abused children receive the right support to 
    prevent them developing mental health conditions. 
Elaine Chalmers, service head for Childline in Scotland, said: 
    “We have to understand why so many children are reaching 
    such a desperate emotional state that they feel they have no option 
    but to end their lives. As a society, we cannot be content that a 
    generation of children feel so worthless, alone and cut off from 
    support. It is up to all of us to help them feel that life is worth 
    living. 
“Children shouldering mental health problems often feel 
    left in the shadows, their pain is not obviously visible and their 
    injuries cannot be mended with bandages. We must listen to them, 
    find out what is troubling them, and help them overcome their 
    problems. Our It’s Time campaign calls on government to ensure all 
    abused children are given the necessary support to help overcome 
    their ordeals and these harrowing figures show just how urgently 
    this is needed.”
Dame Esther Rantzen, president of Childline said: “It is 
    deeply disturbing that in the past year nearly 20,000 children and 
    young people contacted Childline because they felt so deeply 
    unhappy that many of them wanted to take their own lives. I would 
    urge any young person who feels this way to contact us. It really 
    does make a difference to speak to someone who cares and wants to 
    listen.” 
