Irish Scots twice as likely to be hospitalised or die from 
    alcohol, study reveals
 Study reveals ethnic variations in 
    alcohol-related hospitalisations and deaths
IRISH people in Scotland are twice as likely to be hospitalised 
    or die from alcohol-related diseases than white Scottish people, 
    new research suggests.
And the risk for women from a mixed ethnic background is almost 
    100 times that of white Scots, said scientists from the University 
    of Edinburgh.
The study also shows that people from a Chinese or Pakistani 
    background had the lowest risks of alcohol-related illness or 
    death.
Researchers say that ethnic variations were a "cause 
    for concern" and lessons should be learned from the 
    communities with low rates of death and illness from alcohol 
    use.
The large-scale study is believed to be the first to use a 
    reliable measure of ethnicity, taking data from the NHS and the 
    2001 Census.
It looks into ethnic variations in the rates of hospital 
    admission and deaths resulting from alcohol use, and uses the rate 
    of disease in the white Scottish population, Scotland's 
    largest ethnic group, as its benchmark.
Findings showed that compared with rates for white Scottish 
    people, the risks of alcohol-related disease hospitalisations or 
    deaths for Irish people living in Scotland increased by 82 per cent 
    for men and 55 per cent for women.
The corresponding risks of alcohol-related disease 
    hospitalisations or deaths for women of mixed ethnicity in Scotland 
    increased by 99 per cent compared with white Scottish women.

For Chinese men or women, the risks of alcohol-related disease 
    hospitalisations each decreased by around 45 per cent, while the 
    decrease was 33 per cent for Pakistani men and 52 per cent for 
    Pakistani women compared to white Scottish people. The report, 
    however, did also say that they were at greatest risk of other 
    liver diseases such as viral hepatitis.
The researchers said that they hope the findings will inform 
    public health policy on alcohol use, pricing and taxation for the 
    whole population of Scotland.
Dr Neeraj Bhala, who conducted the study at University of 
    Edinburgh’s Centre for Population Health Sciences, said: 
    "The ethnic variation in the alcohol and liver-related 
    hospitalisations and deaths in Scotland found in this large-scale 
    study is a cause for concern.
"We have important lessons to learn about preventing 
    these alcohol- and liver-related deaths, and we should look to 
    communities with typically low levels of alcohol consumption to 
    help develop policies that benefit the whole population of 
    Scotland."
According to data from the National Records of Scotland, there 
    were 1,152 alcohol-related deaths in the country in 2014, of which 
    784 were men, and 368 women.
Over the years since 1979, there have been roughly twice as many 
    male deaths as female deaths.
In 2014/15, there were 35,059 alcohol-related hospital stays, 91 
    per cent resulting from an emergency admission.
Although alcohol-related deaths have declined in recent years, 
    rates remain higher than they were in the early 1980s and higher 
    than those in England and Wales.
The findings from the University of Edinburgh study have been 
    published in the journal Alcohol and Alcoholism.
