92,400 Scots now working beyond retirement age
 There has been a 90 per cent rise in 
    the number of working pensioners in last 12 years. Picture: 
    Contributed
The number of people working beyond retirement age in 
    Scotland has almost doubled since 2004, new Scottish Government 
    statistics show.
The number of workers aged 65 and over has risen by 94 per cent 
    in the last 12 years from 41,200 to 80,000.
A document titled Regional Employment Patterns published 
    yesterday showed that the employment rate amongst the over-65s had 
    risen from 5.2 per cent to 8.2 per cent.
Opposition politicians and old people’s charities expressed 
    concern about pensioner poverty following the publication of the 
    report.
According to the report, there were 92,400 workers in Scotland 
    last year who were over state pension age. The main reason given 
    for remaining in work was that they were not ready to stop work yet 
    (57 per cent). Thirteen per cent, however, had chosen to remain in 
    work to pay for essential items such as bills while 8 per cent 
    remained in employment to boost their pension pot.
Other reasons cited included wanting to take up the opportunity 
    to work flexible hours and wanting to stay both mentally and 
    physically fit.
But the suggestion that the elderly were having to keep working 
    to pay for essential items concerned Labour’s Jackie Baillie.
Ms Baillie said: “It is clear that more and more older 
    people are continuing to work past their retirement age,both the 
    Tory and SNP governments should be asking serious questions as to 
    why more pensioners are staying in work and how that relates to 
    living standards.”
Age Scotland welcomed older people remaining in employment when 
    it was being done for the right reasons but expressed concerns 
    about those forced to work.
A spokeswoman for the charity said: “Age Scotland 
    welcomes that almost two-thirds of those who keep working beyond 
    state pension age say they’re doing so because they’re not ready to 
    retire yet, or they want to develop new skills or 
    experiences.
“However, these figures also indicate that thousands of 
    people in Scotland are working beyond the state pension age to pay 
    for essential items which shows that issues of pensioner poverty 
    cannot be ignored.”
Yesterday’s report also revealed that the number of teenagers 
    who are leaving school to do nothing has risen. There were 
    there were 3,000 more 
    16-19-year-olds not in employment, education or training (NEETs) in 
    2015 than the previous year, bringing the total to 23,000 NEETs.
Overall the report showed employment levels in Scotland during 
    January to December 2015 reached a record high 2,575,500, driven by 
    continued increases in the employment level for women.
A Scottish Government spokesman said: “These figures show 
    that more over-65s are choosing to continue to work and we believe 
    that remaining in employment past retirement age should be a choice 
    rather than necessity.”
