The wonderful world of Hipsters

EXACTLY a year ago VICE magazine denounced the cult of the 
    hipster, proclaiming that the world had reached ‘peak hipster’ and 
    was now on to the next thing, whatever that was.
“Hipsters were like your little brother, scratching at 
    the door dying to be noticed and appreciated, but doing little to 
    warrant it,” the magazine sneered. “Now it's all a big 
    homogenized fatberg of different idiots, some trendy, some 
    not.”
Nicely put, VICE. Bringing up the rear last week, style 
    chronicler Peter York (the man who, in the 1980s, put a name to 
    that useful group of whinnying, well-scrubbed gels, the Sloane 
    Rangers) broadcast his documentary take on this social tribe. With 
    his laconic posho delivery and bemused expression, he seemed 
    hopelessly behind the curve identifying this ‘new’ creature that 
    was populating Shoreditch in East London.
Once the epicentre of hipsterdom, most commentators would now 
    agree the neighbourhood has eaten itself, disappearing into a theme 
    park of stereotype and cliché. “Shoreditch is no longer a place, 
    it’s a state of mind,” opined York. Yeah, Pete, totally true, but 
    you’re about five years late to the party.
And where VICE leads, we are all sure to follow, one day, but 
    meanwhile, London’s trickle-down hipster effect has distilled 
    itself into a proper, revitalising scene in Scotland stretching 
    from Glasgow to Aberdeen. Being a little further north, we are 
    still (kind of) experiencing the full gamut of hipsterdom minus the 
    eye-rolling and tutting of cooler people already on to something 
    else.
Peak hipster may be happening elsewhere, but we’ve yet to reach 
    that status in Scotland, although it’s probably not too far off. 
    This whole movement based on resisting the mainstream has almost 
    capitulated to being just that.
I know Shoreditch well. I worked in the heart of it for six 
    years for a young publishing company. Sometimes when I came home to 
    Scotland, I would breathe a sigh of relief. People were normal, 
    still stylish, but in an individual Glasgow-stylish kind of a way. 
    There were no dudes with Ned Kelly beards wearing skinny jeans and 
    donkey jackets with their knobbly little mankles, jaunty matelot 
    tops and woolly Serpico hats.
After a while this East End uniform, this craft-beer/artisanal 
    coffee/fixie bike sensibility that oozed out of every cobbled 
    Shoreditch street got right on your tatts. Young people, with their 
    perfect skin and lack of problems and pontificating ideas and 
    triple-shot Ecuadorian soya lattes and cocktails in jam jars and 
    zero awareness that one day life will break their very souls in 
    two, seemed easy to scorn.
Because that’s what hipsters are – young.
But beyond their youth, vitality and ability to look good in 
    skinny jeans, what exactly is the vibe of the tribe that has 
    colonised the likes of Finnieston in Glasgow – now proclaimed by 
    everyone, everywhere, as the most exciting place to live in the UK 
    – and how does it translate to a Scottish climate?
First rule of hipster club: don’t talk about hipster club.
There is a huge reluctance for hipsters to admit they’re 
    hipsters. Whether it’s that Groucho Marx 
    don’t-want-to-belong-to-a-club-that-would-have-me thing or that 
    once you admit to being part of it, you’re not cool and individual 
    any more, it’s hard to say. While everyone certainly looks the 
    part, they are not happy to be labelled with the H word.
Caroline Young, the Edinburgh-born author of Style Tribes, says 
    it’s about appearances. “You don’t want to look like you’re 
    trying too hard, you don’t want to be seen as a fashion victim, but 
    expressing yourself is a good thing; you would rather be defined by 
    what you’re interested in.”
Twenty-three year old barman Ross MacLean agrees. 
    “Hipster is not a word I would use, it’s so overused. Yes, I 
    am into the Lumberjack look, with the plaid shirt and the big 
    beard, but I feel the word hipster has negative connotations, so I 
    don’t associate myself with it. I am just interested in the things 
    that I am interested in – craft beer and music.”
Ah, craft beer. Along with single-origin coffee and barber 
    emporiums, craft beer completes the holy trinity of hipster 
    signifiers. The company MacLean works for, Brewdog, has been a 
    phenomenal Scottish business success story. And that success is 
    down not just to superlative craft beers but extremely astute 
    marketing and styling that surfed the hipster trend just as it 
    began to swell into a monster wave.
Founders James Watt and Martin Dickie began their small 
    craft-beer operation in Aberdeenshire in 2007 as the sole staff and 
    shareholders, bottling their own home-made beers by hand. Fast 
    forward to 2016 and this young Scottish company operates with 540 
    staff, 32,000 shareholders and 44 bars around the world from 
    Scotland to Brazil, with their latest venture opening this week in 
    Berlin – arguably the hippest city in the world.
As Peter York asserts in The Hipster Handbook, “Hipsters 
    don’t invent, they curate, and the real creativity lies in 
    entrepreneurial activity.”
Brewdog’s story exactly encapsulates the idea of the 
    hipster-creators – the wave of young entrepreneurs who embraced the 
    thinking that this trend was not just about what you looked like, 
    but what you ate, drank and actually made – and the story you 
    created around it.
Watt and Dickie were tired of the unimaginative, 
    industrially-produced beers they found in pubs, so they decided to 
    make their own beers and tell their own story. And this they did by 
    cherry picking elements for their look – the exposed brick and 
    stripped-back interiors, the random, confounding beer names, the 
    logo, the graphics and the typography. They even created their own 
    plaid shirt.
“We live in a post-post-post-modern world,” says 
    York. “Hipsters are not looking forward, but borrowing 
    heavily from the past. Even though they are often self-employed in 
    modern creative industries like web design, media and architecture, 
    they like to look like they do old-world jobs like lumberjacks and 
    truckers: their uniform is workwear, denim, tattoos and 
    beards,” he explains.
Indeed the notable thing about the hipster trend is just how 
    masculine it is – the popular stereotype that dominates is 
    overwhelmingly male and conforms to the bushy-bearded, 
    tattoo-sleeved, plaid-clad, skinny-jeaned, beanie-wearing bloke. 
    Women seem under-represented in a way that is rare with other style 
    tribes – even Punk – where they are highly visible.
“Men are traditionally more limited than women in their 
    fashion options,” says Caroline Young, “so the 
    hipster thing was an opportunity for a lot of young men to really 
    experiment with their own style and create a look. Women have a 
    wider pool of influences and are more confident in diverse looks. 
    They can choose from burlesque or vintage influences or the 
    festival boho vibe, for example.”
Keir McCluskey, a 22-year-old designer who has landed the holy 
    grail of hipster jobs with global social enterprise Cycle Hack 
    (“making the world more sustainable by reducing the barriers to 
    cycling”) also declines to be associated with the term but admits 
    that elements of his lifestyle embrace the trend. He believes the 
    hipster look allows men to adopt the kind of grooming and styling 
    traditionally employed by women, but still within a very masculine 
    look.
“If men can find a ‘uniform’ that they like, that makes 
    them look good and is cool into the bargain, then it’s a win-win!” 
    he laughs. “But I do think that Glasgow has its own take on the 
    look. It’s a bit more grounded, less self-conscious and enjoyed 
    with a good dose of tongue in cheek and individuality.”
Tony Wright of Mohair barbers feels the same way. He recently 
    moved his small shop on King Street to a massive pogonophile’s 
    [beardophile] emporium on the Trongate, peopled with über-hip staff 
    and decked out in wood, neon and skulls. Beside quiffs, undercuts 
    and Peaky Blinder flops, he does a roaring trade in grooming and 
    beard care.
“We get all sorts of people in here, not just hipsters – 
    a word I hate by the way. But we’ve always had stylish people in 
    Glasgow, hipsters are not new,” he says. “I saw a 
    guy the other day in dress trousers, a cashmere turtleneck, a 
    moleskin coat and a huge Amish-style hat. He was certainly turning 
    heads.
"But Glasgow isn’t Shoreditch, we don’t get too 
    ridiculous, we like to keep it real and stay grounded. Our turn ups 
    aren’t as big.”
For the origin of the trend that has a nostalgia for craft, 
    vintage and heritage at its heart, we need to row back to 9/11 and 
    the dark days America experienced following the World Trade Center 
    atrocities. “People were looking for something to take comfort in 
    after 9/11,” says Caroline Young. “And nostalgia can be very 
    comforting. When things are difficult it can be easier to look 
    back.”
In places like Brooklyn, artists were moving in to an old 
    Jewish/Latino neighbourhood called Williamsburg, the kind of barrio 
    that was so down-at-heel and disregarded that the rents were cheap. 
    Following their lead were educated but low-paid youngsters also 
    looking for cheap rents, and gradually they started creating 
    businesses for the people around them.
It was the same in Shoreditch, a place where 20 years ago you 
    couldn’t give away property. Where artists colonise, creativity 
    flourishes and gives birth to a whole new community around it, 
    energised by people who may not have money but compensate with 
    ideas, talent and innovation.
And now that is true of places in Glasgow like Dennistoun, the 
    Gallowgate and Finnieston where artists have traditionally and 
    quietly worked away in places like the WASPS studios and the 
    ramshackle spaces in the Hidden Lane behind Argyle Street. Small 
    creative industries have collected around them and helped to grow 
    these communities and attract new people.
In turn have come the bars, restaurants and indie shops and 
    services like boutiques and barbers, bringing new energy to 
    neighbourhoods that largely went unnoticed before.
The downside of that, of course, is the dreaded gentrification, 
    the kind of development that has seen whole swathes of 
    working-class and immigrant areas of London cleared out to make way 
    for young urban people that can afford the new flats and houses 
    being built. The same has happened in Brooklyn, where the 
    once-shabby, affordable Williamsburg now has five-star hotels and 
    $3million dollar apartments on its waterfront.
But this is perhaps where Scotland differs. Here communities 
    seem to be managing regeneration without changing the essence of 
    the neighbourhoods or pushing anyone out. In Glasgow’s Gallowgate, 
    there are two projects seeking to reverse the decline of the Barras 
    market which has suffered from serious neglect over the last few 
    years.
Former church St Luke’s on Bain Street in the Calton has been 
    restored and transformed into a thriving arts and music venue. Just 
    opened behind the iconic Barrowlands music hall is BAaD (Barras Art 
    & Design), a hub for creative talent that brings together 
    artists’ studios, offices, a soaring glass-roofed event space and 
    an excellent seafood restaurant and bar, with plans for street food 
    stalls and other eating spaces.
Tellingly, there are deliberately no plans for residential 
    development, the point being to draw people back to using and 
    enjoying an area that was once the beating heart of the city. BAaD 
    also aims to offer apprenticeships to local youngsters as a way of 
    keeping the local community in mind and involved. In December it 
    will be home to a Christmas market, giving locals the chance to see 
    how infectious a little vision and creative energy can be in a 
    neighbourhood.
At the other end of the city, Finnieston has proudly retained 
    its low-key feel, fusing a handful of seriously good restaurants 
    and cool bars with existing shops and businesses such as the 
    Majestic Laundrette that sits like a happy matron between two 
    achingly cool kids, a chic restaurant on one side and a buzzing bar 
    on the other. Many places have been happy to rub away years of 
    paint to expose and retain the vintage shop signs and original 
    architectural elements.
And while hipsters generally come in for a lot of flak and 
    derision, that’s what people love about the movement. It’s peopled 
    with innovators and doers, enthusiasts who want to rejuvenate and 
    redefine old neighbourhoods and bring something new to the 
    community table. They want to resurrect the ideals of 
    craftsmanship, heritage and creativity as a buffer against crass, 
    faceless commercialisation. Peter York sums it up best in The 
    Hipster Handbook when he acknowledges that, “hipsters marked 
    the shift from the besuited masters of the universe to the craft 
    beer/bike/organic/locally sourced notion of 
    authenticity.”
But then, how long till it all tips over into parody? Already a 
    few bandwagon joints have made an appearance in Finnieston ticking 
    all the hipster boxes: distressed wood, exposed brick, industrial 
    tiling? Check. Twelve kinds of chicken wings? You got it. Artisanal 
    pizza? Naturally. Served on a shovel by someone with sailor Jerry 
    tatts? Roger that.
And this is what so often sounds the death-knell: when big 
    business gets wise to the act and starts to co-opt and contrive the 
    elements of a trend to bring it to the masses.
So has our hipster scene gone mainstream? Possibly, but in 
    Scotland it has brought so many positives that it will doubtless 
    linger awhile. People like what has happened in their city 
    neighbourhoods – they relish the colour, the variety, and want that 
    energising vibe to stay. But that, inevitably will mean changing, 
    moving on, keeping things fresh.
Already there is talk of the beard thing being on the wane. 
    “Interest in beards will continue but I can see people in 
    Glasgow cutting about with a big moustache,” says barber Tony 
    Wright. “And I’ve already noticed a crossover between hipsters and 
    skateboarders with their bobbly hats, massive oversize check shirts 
    and three-quarter length trousers. It’s happening 
    already.”
Scotland’s hipster scene
Glasgow
Redmonds; Dog House; Nice 'n' Sleazy; In Deep; SWG3; 
    Brewdog; Kelvingrove Cafe; Alchemilla; The Finnieston; Soul Barber 
    Rooms; Mohair; Brother Barbers; Mr Ben; Starry Starry Night; 
    Glasgow Vintage Co; Saratoga Trunk
Edinburgh
Summerhall; Panda & Sons; Brewlab Coffee; Hoot the Redeemer; 
    Skylark; The Hanging Bat; The Brotique; Aesop; Vinyl Villains; 
    Armstrong’s; The Frayed Hem; Stockbridge Market
Dundee
Folk Cafe; Beer Kitchen; Jam Jar; Brewdog
Aberdeen
The Food Story Cafe; Brewdog; Krakatoa; Retrospect; The Closet 
    Vintage
