Growing communities as migrants settle in 

The Mediterranean island of Sicily has always been a 
    crossroads of cultures and agriculture, a legacy that today is 
    manifested in the richness and diversity of its food production and 
    gastronomic heritage.
In ancient times, the vine and the olive tree of Sicily were the 
    most important crops. Then, under the influence of Rome, Sicily 
    became the wheat granary of the empire. More recently, the island 
    has assumed the role of garden of Europe, with its unique fruit and 
    vegetable products – the red oranges of Catania, lemons and 
    artichokes of Syracuse, table grapes of Mazzarrone and Canicattì 
    and pistachios of Bronte. Today European essential oils 
    distributors see in Sicily one of the main sources of the pure 
    produce in a global market expected to be worth almost £12 billion 
    by 2022 as demand for organic personal care products soars.
Large-scale immigration is transforming communities across 
    immigrant-receiving Sicilian towns in fundamental ways and 
    challenging notions of national identity. It is not uncontroversial 
    given the fragile state of its economy and limited capacity to 
    absorb the continuous flow of migrant jobseekers.
This is the scenario in the Piazza Armerina commune in the 
    province of Enna. With 20,000 inhabitants in this baroque town an 
    experiment is transforming the way migrants integrate culturally 
    and socio-economically.
There, migrants from 16 countries have been hosted by one of the 
    hundred SPRARs (System of Protection for Asylum Seekers and 
    Refugees) initiatives spread throughout the Italian territory, 
    ensuring “integrated reception” to asylum seekers under the wings 
    of the Sicilia Integra project. 
Sicilia Integra is the product of a partnership involving 
    University of Catania, Gaia Education, Sicilian farmers and many 
    others. It aims to foster the integration of migrants through 
    comprehensive agricultural capacity-building activities while 
    increasing the production and commercialisation of Sicilian organic 
    products in European markets.
Before being integrated into the organic farming communities, 
    migrants join a five-week course providing knowledge and practical 
    skills around regenerative and organic techniques, focusing on the 
    environment, society and economy.
The course also supports young unemployed Sicilians.
Via sustainable community design and regenerative agriculture 
    methods, Sicilia Integra helps newcomers settle in to local 
    communities, encouraging collaborative decision-making and 
    recognising the immense power for social change that lies in 
    building multicultural communities.
The learning highlights climate change in food, land, 
    biodiversity and water systems –bringing culture back to 
    agriculture – and an understanding of the diversity of cultural 
    influences on food patterns. 
Sicilia Integra advocates that immigration can also represent a 
    “transformational” opportunity and an effective way to ease people 
    out of situations of vulnerability, building long-term resilience 
    for both migrants and communities.
The fate of migrants fleeing North Africa has confronted Europe 
    with the reality of its refugee crisis, as desperate people trying 
    to reach the Continent in overcrowded ships die at sea. So far EU 
    and national policies have failed to adopt an integrated response 
    to deal with this complex problem. 
The latest drownings are a reminder of the cruel paradox of the 
    Mediterranean calendar: as summer approaches with blue skies, warm 
    weather and tranquil waters, human trafficking along the North 
    African coastline gets a new impulse. In Enna, at least, the 
    victims of traffickers have become agents of change, building a 
    better future, free from poverty and war.
Here lies the power of serendipity. Piazza Armerina, Sicilia 
    Integra and the first generation of immigrant farmers may have 
    accidentally discovered something valuable. The future can only be 
    multicultural. 
