Sat nav technology is giving us all a new sense of 
    direction
Chances are the beautiful summer weather inspired a few day 
    trips and Sunday drives – but how many of us reached our 
    destination without getting lost?
Not many, if recently-released research is to be believed.
Almost half (42%) of people refuse to openly admit when they get 
    lost for fear of embarrassment, while more than a quarter (26%) 
    won’t seek help and ask for directions, despite being lost.
It’ll come as no surprise to read that 27% more men than women 
    admit to being too proud to ask for directions.
And those relaxing drives can quickly become fraught, with more 
    than a third of the 2,000 people who were surveyed revealing they 
    regularly find themselves in arguments with their partner over 
    directions.
None of this will come as a shock when it’s revealed 38% of 
    Scots don’t know how to navigate using a traditional map and need 
    to rely on guided directions to help them.
The figures come from GPS specialists Garmin to mark the 
    company’s 25th anniversary.
The global leader in sat navs found that nearly a quarter of 
    people surveyed are heavily reliant on using their GPS devices, 
    even using it for journeys they make often.
Kirsty Quartley, Garmin’s PND product manager, said: 
    “Technology plays an integral role in almost everything we 
    do, so much so that our Generation Y unequivocally view it not as a 
    luxury but as a life necessity.
"The research highlights just how reliant we are on 
    technology to help get us through our everyday routines and it’s 
    becoming increasingly clear that without it, people simply feel 
    ‘lost’. As is the case without the security of some form of 
    navigation device nearby, that becomes literal.
“Our sat nav usage has evolved over time from being a 
    tool that just gets you from A to B to delivering features that 
    help reduce the stress of driving.
“Sat navs are also doing their bit to make sure you 
    operate more safely in the car with many products offering 
    hands-free calling, voice-activated navigation and audible 
    prompts.
“No more excuses of ‘traffic made me late’ and no more 
    arguing about whether you’re in the right lane – the sat nav is 
    right!”
