Internet use among over-75s doubles despite gender 
    gap
 How the UK uses the internet.
Internet use among the over-75s has nearly doubled in 
    the last five years, but two-thirds of older women have still never 
    used the internet, according to new figures from the Office for 
    National Statistics (ONS).
Figures published on internet use for the first three months of 
    this year show that while the vast majority of adults in the UK are 
    now regular internet users, the number of disabled people and women 
    over 75 who have never used the internet remains high.
According to the statistics, 87.9 per cent of UK adults - more 
    than 45.9 million people - used the internet in the last three 
    months.
However, 25 per cent of disabled people in the UK have never 
    been online, while less than a third of women over 75 have accessed 
    the web in 2016, according to the figures.
Mark Atkinson, chief executive at disability charity Scope, 
    said: “These figures show that disabled people still face a 
    huge digital divide.
“It’s shocking that in 2016 a quarter of disabled people 
    have never used the internet, compared to just 10 per cent of the 
    adult population overall.
“Digital access has the power to make life cost less. 
    Many people go online to compare the best consumer deals and 
    offers.
“Life costs more if you are disabled, from higher energy 
    bills to specialist equipment Scope research shows these costs add 
    up to on average £550 per month.”
The latest figures also revealed that between January and March 
    this year more than five million people used the internet for the 
    first time.
Pete Lee, from the Office for National Statistics’ surveys and 
    economic division, said of the findings: “While we have seen 
    a notable increase in internet usage across all groups in recent 
    years, many older and disabled people are still not online, with 
    two-thirds of women over 75 having never used the 
    internet.”
However, women in the same age bracket have also seen the 
    largest rise in recent internet users, up 169 per cent since 2011, 
    the ONS said.
