‘Legal’ highs a low point 

NOVEL Psychoactive Substances, the dry scientific terminology 
    for what are more commonly known as “legal high” drugs may 
    represent the biggest threat to drug enforcement, drug treatment 
    and drug prevention that the UK has faced for decades.
Over the last 50 years UK government drugs policy has concerned 
    itself, for the most part, with heroin, cocaine, LSD, amphetamines, 
    cannabis and, more recently, ecstasy. Now, with the production and 
    distribution of legal highs at the rate of one a week, often from 
    laboratories in China, that list is looking increasingly out of 
    date and the government’s response increasingly out of touch.
It is ironic that China should be the source of so many of the 
    legal high drugs that are now being openly sold in “headshops” and 
    via the internet across the UK. In the face of vehement opposition 
    from the Chinese government, Britain enforced its right to export 
    opium to China in the 1800s through gunboat diplomacy and the two 
    Opium Wars. Now, 150 year later, China is returning the favour – 
    exporting a growing number of legal high drugs and in the process 
    delivering a massive headache to governments around the world.
The list of novel psychoactive substances currently being sold 
    in the UK is as bewildering as it is vague in cloaking what the 
    drugs themselves actually contain: Anhiliation, Toxic Waste, High 
    Beams, Lime Fantastic, Sectioned, Dr Death, Fanny Powder.
What is being traded here is not pharmacology but experiential 
    exotica and it is the appeal of those promised new, risky 
    experiences that draws in a market of young people who might not 
    otherwise consider themselves to be drug users. One may well wonder 
    though what consumer need is being met by a drug which in its 
    labelling seems to promise some form of personal annihilation.
What’s in a name, you might ask? An awful lot, it turns out.
When MDMA was first marketed as a recreational drug it was going 
    to be called Empathy. Ecstasy was felt to be a name that would 
    appeal to a wider market and hey presto, within months a largely 
    unknown appetite suppressant had become the must-have drug in clubs 
    and raves across Europe. Get the name right and your market expands 
    beyond even your wildest dreams.
The willingness of young people to consume drugs without 
    actually knowing what they are taking was evident in the 2012 
    Global Drug Survey in which 15 per cent of 15,000 people questioned 
    said they had consumed a powder without knowing what it was.
The legal high drugs have taken that willingness to an entirely 
    new level with literally hundreds of substances now being consumed 
    by people who neither know nor care what the drugs contain. The age 
    of brand loyalty, and a single preferred drug, may now be dead in a 
    world that has moved on to a plethora of exotically-named 
    substances that are limited only by the imagination of those 
    involved in their marketing.
In 2013 the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime identified 
    the UK as having the largest market in novel psychoactive substance 
    use anywhere in Europe, with an estimated 670,000 young people 
    having consumed a legal high.
In the last five years there have been 154 deaths in England and 
    Wales linked to legal highs, with the number of deaths leaping some 
    80 per cent from 29 in 2011 to 52 in 2012. In Scotland there were 
    12 deaths linked to the novel psychoactive substances in 2010, with 
    that figure more than trebling to 47 in 2012.
According to the 2012 Global Drug Survey, a quarter of those who 
    had consumed the now banned legal high mephedrone reported feelings 
    of agitation, one in ten reported feeling chest pains, just under 
    half reported feeling depressed and a quarter reported having 
    experienced memory loss.
Despite those worrying statistics the UK government recently 
    announced that it had no intention of banning the headshops that 
    are now sprouting up in high streets across the country selling 
    legal highs. Instead the government favours a policy of imposing a 
    temporary ban on specific legal highs where there is prima facie 
    evidence of harm and a full ban where there is clear evidence of 
    harm.
The trouble with a policy that looks at each drug in turn is 
    that it is simply overwhelmed by the sheer scale of production of 
    the legal highs. No less worrying, though, the UK government 
    response effectively leaves young people as the guinea pigs in 
    their own national experiment; only when the hospital admission 
    statistics start to mount up will the government take action. That 
    is a shocking abrogation of responsibility.
Increasingly in Europe other governments are taking a much 
    tougher line on the headshops selling legal highs. In Ireland and 
    Poland headshops were banned in 2010. In Portugal, where all drugs 
    were decriminalised for personal use in 2002, the government has 
    decided that no such liberal stance can be taken on the headshops, 
    with the shops selling these drugs banned in 2013.
Other countries outside of Europe are exploring the possible use 
    of trading standards legislation to control the availability legal 
    high drugs. The government in New Zealand, for example, has passed 
    legislation licensing the sale of legal highs where the 
    manufacturers of these drugs can prove that they are of only low 
    harm.
On the face of it that may sound like a smart move, making the 
    producers of the legal high drugs responsible for the safety of 
    their products in the same way as occurs with the wider 
    pharmaceutical industry. However, nobody in New Zealand believes 
    that the legal high producers have either the will or the capacity 
    to mount an equivalent drug-testing programme to that carried out 
    by the pharmaceutical industry.
There is, though, a big difference between assessing the harm of 
    a drug in the short term and understanding its possible impact in 
    the long term. In New Zealand researchers recently reported that 
    over time cannabis use was associated with a marked reduction in 
    measured intelligence. The research was based on testing the 
    intelligence of cannabis smokers over a 38 year period.
In the absence of such long-term research, the New Zealand 
    government may find itself on the wrong end of legal action 
    initiated by consumers who had taken a licenced product believing 
    that its approval ensured its safety, only to find that the drug 
    has caused serious long-term harm.
Handing the responsibility for assessing the harm of legal high 
    drugs to those who have a financial interest in their rapid and 
    widespread consumption may turn out to be a costly move on the part 
    of the New Zealand government.
Banning headshops may turn out to be the easiest option for a 
    government trying to stem the sales of these drugs. Legal highs are 
    now only an internet-click away; ordered in seconds and delivered 
    to an address near you.
To stem that trade it will be necessary to bring substantial 
    diplomatic pressure to bear on the producer countries, encouraging 
    their drug enforcement agencies to follow the internet trade back 
    to its source, identify the laboratories producing the drugs and 
    seize the assets of those involved in the legal highs business.
The fact that China is one of the market leaders in the legal 
    highs business may make the prospect of effective diplomatic action 
    that much harder, but no less necessary. In the absence of such 
    effective action, expect the numbers of legal highs on sale to grow 
    and the statistics on drug-related deaths to rise.
