Longer hospital stays for terminally-ill rural Scots 
    patients
 Richard Meade, Marie 
    Curies head of policy and public 
    affairs Scotland. Picture: Contributed
Terminally-ill patients in rural communities are 
    facing longer hospital stays due to challenges in finding 
    end-of-life care in their area, a study has found.
Glasgow University experts found that remote areas such as 
    Orkney and Shetland incurred much higher healthcare costs for dying 
    patients than cities, through analysis of 15 years of patient 
    records from across Scotland.
Rural patients tended to stay for longer periods of time in 
    hospital, which could have a negative impact on their health and 
    wellbeing, due to a lack of social care or hospice care available 
    so the patients can be discharged.
The team suggested providing more care at home would reduce 
    costs and prove better for patients, in line with the Scottish 
    Government’s plans to shift care away from hospitals.
Lead researcher Dr Claudia Geue, a lecturer in health economics 
    at Glasgow University, said: “We know that the last three to 
    six months of life are the most expensive part, particularly any 
    hospital stays.
“We think this highlights the particular difficulties 
    rural communities have when discharging patients in the last couple 
    of months of their lives.
“There is a shortage of end-of-life facilities in rural 
    and remote areas.”
Travelling longer distances to hospital is linked to higher 
    mortality rates from heart attacks and stroke, the study published 
    in the Age and Ageing journal also said.
Last year, the Scottish Government announced a £3.5 million 
    boost for palliative care to allow everyone to have more choices at 
    the end of their lives.
Richard Meade, Marie Curie’s head of policy and public affairs 
    Scotland, said: “We welcome this report which offers an 
    important analysis of some of the concerns associated with 
    delivering end of life care in rural communities.
“At Marie Curie we know that rural patients living with a 
    terminal illness can face barriers to care, such as a lack of 
    accessible transport and specialist services, physical and social 
    isolation, inconsistent out-of-hours services and limited staff 
    resources.
“Access to palliative care services can improve quality 
    of life and support people to live at home or in a community 
    setting, where this is their choice.”
