Long-lasting genetic divide in Scotland 
 Iona. The St John's Cross at the 
    Abbey.
In the third installment of a five-part series, author 
    and historian Alistair Moffat examines Scottish DNA and finds a 
    long-lasting genetic divide in different parts of 
    Scotland.
Made from cow hides caulked with fat or resin and lashed onto a 
    frame of whippy, green rods stiffened by thwarts used as benches, 
    sea-going curraghs were so light that they sat on the wave-crests 
    like seagulls.

Ancient craft noted in a 7th century Scottish muster roll known 
    as the Senchus Fer na h’Alban, they could be large, ‘seven 
    benchers’ rowed by crews of fourteen men. On the southern coast of 
    Iona a place-name remembers curraghs making landfall, pulled up 
    onto the beach above the high tidemark. More than time-worn 
    tradition, 
Port a’ Curraich may indeed be the place where Columba first 
    splashed ashore on the island that would become a memorial to his 
    saintly, exemplary life. 
The first Abbot of Iona may have been the most famous and most 
    influential, but he was one of many thousands who left Ireland to 
    cross the North Channel in their sea-going curraghs in the 
    centuries after 
c500AD.

It is possible to be sure that thousands came after that date 
    because of research carried out by ScotlandsDNA over the past four 
    years. Our geneticists have discovered a Y chromosome marker that 
    remembers those voyages through the powerful riptides between the 
    Irish coast and the Galloway shore.
Labelled, R1b-S661, it arose in 
    Ireland and was almost certainly the marker of the powerful Ui 
    Neill, the kindred who claimed descent from the first High King of 
    Ireland, Niall Noigiallach. It is found in very large numbers of 
    Irishmen: 35 per cent of all those in Connaught, 31 per cent in 
    Leinster and 29 per cent in Ulster. It is believed that Niall ruled 
    some time around the beginning of the 5th century.
Hidden inside these statistics is evidence of a real and 
    long-lasting genetic divide in Scotland. Because the steersmen of 
    curraghs and the craft that came after them could see the hills of 
    the Scottish coast from the Antrim shore, at least on a fine day, 
    most of the descendants of Niall Noigiallach settled in the west of 
    Scotland.
In Glasgow, Strathclyde and Dumfries and Galloway, the evidence 
    for migration now walks the streets as 10 per cent of all men, 
    about 150,000, have royal Irish blood running in their veins. By 
    contrast in Fife, Perthshire and Tayside, only five per cent can 
    claim descent from the High King and in the north and west, the 
    frequency declines to 3.7 per cent. These numbers trace an ancient 
    pattern of Irish

settlement in Scotland.
The oarsmen in the curraghs brought their language to Scotland 
    in the 5th and 6th centuries. Scots Gaelic is a dialect of Irish 
    Gaelic and as the power of the western kings extended over the 
    Pictish speaking peoples, the language of power gained more and 
    more currency.
Ancestral DNA and the population movements it charts are 
    sometimes mirrored in the nature of language. When our species, 
    Homo sapiens, began to move out of Africa and pioneers trekked and 
    sailed eastwards, a clear pattern of what is known as phonemic 
    diversity developed.
This measures the number of distinct units of sound (as opposed 
    to written letters) in a language, the consonants, vowels and 
    tones. And the modern pattern of phonemic diversity appears to 
    march in the steps of these ancient migrations.

The contrasts are striking. Just as our ancestral DNA has 
    existed in Africa much longer than in, for example, Europe, so 
    African languages are far more complex and varied. The Taa language 
    of Botswana and Namibia is dying, now spoken by fewer than 6,000 
    people, but it has 141 phonemes, comprising 58 consonants, 31 
    vowels and 4 tones. These include between 20 and 43 click 
    consonants. It is an astonishing richness developed over many 
    millennia.
By comparison, English has 36 phonemes and Scots Gaelic 44.
Despite a dramatic increase in social mobility in modern times, 
    the map of Scotland still shows the clear watermark of the movement 
    of people in the mists of prehistory and the ancient political 
    divides they created. Scandinavian and Germanic haplogroups are 
    often markedly more common amongst men who live along the eastern, 
    North Sea coasts.
Perhaps that is to be expected, but one fatherline, labeled 
    I-S142, appears to remember the shadow of a Dark Ages kingdom, the 
    frontiers of the realm of Northumbria. Men in this haplogroup make 
    up 9% of the male population of the North of England, six per cent 
    of Yorkshire – and, strikingly, more than 4 per cent in the South 
    East of Scotland with a distinct bias to the Tweed Basin.
This fertile and valuable region of modern Scotland formed part 
    of the kingdom of Northumbria until the pivotal Battle of Carham in 
    1018. Until then the Tweed was a conduit, not a frontier. 
Throughout our history, aggressive immigration has generally 
    been the preserve of men, small groups in small boats who made 
    landfall on Scottish shores or travelled north overland. If they 
    were successful in establishing themselves, many took native women 
    as their partners and 
Scottish mitochondrial DNA tends to look to earlier origins, the 
    haplogroups of the Ice Age Refuges. Almost half of our mtDNA came 
    from Southwestern France and Iberia over a long span of time.
At Dunnichen, probably near Forfar, an ambitious king of 
    Northumbria was killed as he tried to extend his reach north of the 
    Tay. Ecgfrith’s defeat and his nemesis were triumphantly carved on 
    the famous stone in Aberlemno kirkyard in Angus, between Forfar and 
    Brechin. Bridei, king of the Picts, rides across the face of the 
    stone with his soldiers and in the last sequence, Ecgfrith is shown 
    unhorsed and his corpse pecked at by a raven.
Dunnichen was fought in 685 and Pictland survived and flourished 
    for another 150 years – until it suddenly appeared to disappear. 
    All that seemed to remain of this powerful Scottish polity was a 
    scatter of place-names and enigmatic symbol-stones across Fife, 
    Perthshire, Tayside, 
Aberdeenshire and the Moray coastlands. The Pictish language 
    fell entirely out of use and their kings and noble families seemed 
    to fail.
But DNA did not forget the Picts. In 2013 ScotlandsDNA 
    rediscovered a Pictish Y chromosome haplogroup, R1b S749. It is 
    old, about 1,000 to 2,000 years old, and it shows that the Pictish 
    kingdoms and their strange symbols were not the creation of recent 
    immigrants. R1b S749 is very Scottish with 10 per cent of men 
    carrying it compared with only 0.8 per cent in England. 
In addition its frequency inside Scotland overlays the faded map 
    of ancient Pictland with 17 per cent of all men in Central Scotland 
    carrying it, and 14 per cent in North East Scotland, with a decline 
    towards Northern and Western Scotland at eight per cent and South 
    East and South West Scotland at six per cent.
These differences are very statistically significant and they 
    show that far from disappearing, the Picts have not wandered 
    far.
Ancestral DNA has discovered something else of significance. 
    Scotland is fissured with invisible frontiers, hidden in our genes. 
    It is an unwritten history of our people carried inside each and 
    every one us. 
