Can book-gifting increase language skills of Scottish 
    children? 
 Could book-gifting increase language 
    skills of children?
IT’S widely known that reading with children from an 
    early age is beneficial for children’s development.
As a nation we seem to have taken this on board, with most 
    parents in Scotland reading with their young children most days of 
    the week.
However, a recent survey has shown that literacy standards among 
    primary school pupils have fallen since 2012.
One way that charities and governments are attempting to improve 
    language and reading skills is through universal book gifting 
    schemes which provide free books to all families with young 
    children.
But are these schemes useful for parents and, more importantly, 
    do they make a difference for children?
Using data from the Growing Up in Scotland study (GUS), which 
    tracks the lives of two cohorts of Scottish children, researchers 
    from ScotCen have looked at whether exposure to part of one such 
    universal book gifting scheme in Scotland, Bookbug, is linked to 
    how often parents read with their children, and to children’s 
    cognitive development.
Since 2010, Bookbug has tried to encourage and support parents 
    in reading to their little ones by giving out free book packs to 
    every child in Scotland and hosting free song and rhyme sessions – 
    not least in the hope of starting to bridge the gap between more 
    and less advantaged children.
More frequent reading in all families
The results from the GUS research are certainly promising. 
    Almost all parents of children who were 10 months old in 2011 had 
    used one or more Bookbug resources, and this was associated with 
    parents reading more frequently with their child.
There is a risk that universal initiatives of this nature will 
    mainly benefit families that are already more likely to read to 
    their children, such as those where parents are highly educated.
Indeed, in 2011 parents in more advantaged circumstances were 
    more likely to report using the Bookbug packs than those in 
    disadvantaged circumstances.
Nevertheless, amongst parents who used the packs, it was 
    encouraging to find that use was linked to more frequent 
    parent-child reading among all families, regardless of the parents’ 
    level of education.
Vocabulary linked to parents’ education
Our research also found an association between using Bookbug and 
    better vocabulary at age three.
However, this applied only for children with better-educated 
    parents, even after controlling for factors such as the home 
    learning environment.
This could suggest that not only the frequency of parent-child 
    reading but also how parents read with their children is important 
    to improve vocabulary.
Parents with higher levels of education may feel more 
    comfortable explaining difficult words to their children, or 
    encourage their children to be an active part of the story-telling 
    process (sometimes referred to as ‘dialogic reading’). Overall, the 
    GUS findings are encouraging for children and for those involved in 
    promoting book-sharing. 
However, if the aim is for initiatives such as Bookbug to close 
    the gap between more and less advantaged children, it is clear that 
    while provision of books is a good place to start, that alone is 
    not enough.
