Research: Females with autism more likely to go 
    undiagnosed
 Women and girls with autism are more 
    likelly to go undiagnosed and be vulnerable in relationships
Females with autism are more likely to go undiagnosed and be 
    vulnerable when it comes to relationships, research suggests.
Charity Scottish Autism claims that many women and girls with 
    the condition are being missed and often go on to struggle with 
    jobs and relationships as a result.
The research, which also shows that many girls underachieve at 
    school despite being extremely capable because of the failure to 
    diagnose, forms the basis of a new programme by the charity to help 
    females who are on the autism spectrum.
Charlene Tait, development director at Scottish Autism, said: 
    "Among the many issues around access to diagnosis of 
    autism, especially in adults, it is increasingly recognised that 
    females with the condition are being missed.
"We know from engaging and working with autistic 
    girls and women that they have a great deal of potential but can 
    also face many challenges.
"While female-specific research is limited, what 
    there is indicates that autism has an impact across many aspects of 
    their lives and can be detrimental to their overall quality of 
    life.
"Girls who live on the spectrum, for example, may 
    not have the same social networks as their non-autistic peers so 
    they may miss out on the informal learning that goes on among 
    friendship groups and can be more vulnerable in relationships and 
    other situations."
The research revealed that - as well as underachieving - 
    adolescent girls with autism can also be vulnerable to bullying and 
    may develop health problems, including self-harm.
While women with the condition, even those in employment, who 
    are married with children of their own, can struggle to keep a job 
    or maintain successful relationships without proper diagnosis and 
    support.
As a result, some incur mental health problems later in life.
One of the women involved in the study was Stella Macdonald, a 
    55-year-old who only discovered she had Asperger's Syndrome, a 
    form of autism, in 2001.
Ms Macdonald, whose daughter Louise was 
    given also given a formal diagnosis several years 
    beforehand, said her won diagnosis was a bolt out of the blue that 
    "helped pave a path towards self-understanding and 
    acceptance".
The mother-of-three said that because girls are more 
    accommodating of people who are different than boys, it may have 
    seemed to the outside world she was coping when in fact she 
    suffered anxiety, emotional trauma and a constant feeling of 
    failure.
She added: "Even an informal diagnosis, for many of 
    us, is vital in building a better understanding of ourselves and 
    who we are.
"We also need to focus on the barriers when it comes 
    to socialising because, despite the many talents and gifts that an 
    individual with autism has to offer, social barriers can prevent us 
    from reaching our potential and making a great contribution to 
    others and the world."
The Women and Girls Right Click Programme aims to help females 
    of all ages who have autism to better manage some of the challenges 
    they face.
It will provide information on diagnosis, education, employment, 
    relationships and health and wellbeing.
Ms Tait added: "While we focus on helping all people 
    with autism – male or female – through their whole life journey, 
    the Women and Girls Right Click Programme is designed to help 
    address some of the specific challenges faced by females living on 
    the spectrum.
"Research shows the consequences of under-diagnosis 
    and poor levels of understanding or awareness of the needs of this 
    particular group can make them especially vulnerable.
"There are negative outcomes, identified in the 
    limited research that has been done on females autism, which can 
    have a hugely detrimental impact on their lives but this is by no 
    means an inevitability.
"We believe that support through new programmes like 
    this one can help females living with the condition develop and 
    progress so they can get the most out of life."
