Study finds link between university and alcoholism in 
    later life
 Women who went to university and smoke 
    are more at risk of becoming heavy drinkers, study finds
YOUNG people - and particularly women - are more 
    likely to drink heavily if they went to university or became a 
    smoker in their teenage years, new research has 
    shown.
The discovery by Glasgow University researchers shows the 
    gateway to alcohol abuse is more varied than previously believed - 
    explaining the inconsistencies of earlier research.
The study across England, Wales and Scotland found those from a 
    more deprived background were more likely to smoke and less likely 
    to enter higher education. It also discovered adolescent smokers 
    were also more likely to drink weekly as an adolescent and more 
    heavily in early adulthood.
But those who went to college were also more likely to drink 
    heavily in early adulthood - with the phenomenon most prevalent 
    among females.
More independence - free from parental control - combined with 
    being among others of the same age group could be to blame, said 
    the researchers.
Dr Michael Green, of Glasgow University, said: “What this 
    study shows are the different pathways - smoking and higher 
    education - into heavy drinking, depending on young people’s 
    socioeconomic backgrounds.
“These opposing pathways might help explain why previous 
    research on inequalities in young people’s drinking has had 
    inconsistent results.
“It appears heavy drinking in early adulthood is more 
    likely for both adolescent smokers and those who go to university 
    or college.
“That would suggest the pathways to heavy drinking are 
    more varied and opposing than had been previously 
    thought.”
The study of about 30,000 people examined in greater detail how 
    adolescent smoking and higher education relate to the link between 
    socio-economic background and alcohol consumption.
It measured higher education as being in full-time education 
    after the age of 18 years old while heavy drinking was measured as 
    more than 14 units a week for women or 21 for men - about a 
    bottle-and-a-half of wine or seven pints of beer respectively.
The researchers believe the study may have implications for how 
    drinking concerns are targeted and tackled in young people.
Dr Green said: “Currently interventions focused only on 
    heavy drinking in universities/colleges are targeting a more 
    advantaged population and may neglect more disadvantaged 
    drinkers.
“There may be common causes affecting disadvantaged young 
    people that lead to both smoking and heavy drinking. If we can 
    identify and understand these it may be easier to intervene to 
    prevent both.”
Participants were from the 1958 National Child Development 
    Study, the British birth cohort study and the West of Scotland 
    Twenty-07 1970s cohort.
Dr Green said: “In Britain, young adults are more likely 
    to drink heavily both if they smoke and participate in tertiary 
    education (college and university) despite socio-economic back- 
    ground being associated in opposite directions with these risk 
    factors.
“In all cohorts, socio-economic disadvantage was 
    associated with higher chances of smoking in adolescence, and 
    adolescent smoking was associated with heavier drinking in 
    adolescence and early adulthood.
“However, disadvantaged adolescents were less likely to 
    participate in tertiary education, and tertiary education was also 
    associated with heavier drinking in early adulthood, especially for 
    females.”
He said it’s presumably not the actual education but experiences 
    associated with it that account for this.
Dr Green said: “Drinking may be a coping response to 
    transitional challenges, may be valued for social goals or 
    overestimation of how much peers drink may inflate perceived 
    behavioural norms.
“However, these factors may also apply to those 
    transitioning into work and other adult roles.
“Perhaps increasing independence and freedom, combined 
    with low parental monitoring, few adult responsibilities and close 
    involvement with peers in similar situations, contribute to 
    students’ higher drinking levels.
“This association was stronger for females than males. 
    Heavy drinking rates among UK men and women aged 16-24 converged 
    during the 1990s, so the stronger effect of education for females 
    could be historical.
“If not, it could be increasingly important, as female 
    participation in tertiary education has increased in more recent 
    cohorts.”
The study published in Addiction was funded by the Medical 
    Research Council (MRC) and the Scottish Government Chief Scientist 
    Office.
