The ill-health of a sick society 
 Deprivation in Glasgow, Liverpool and 
    Manchester is similar, but Glasgow deaths are 30 per cent 
    higher.
How much clearer does it need to get? Scotland now lies just 
    behind America in the obesity league table, children of overweight 
    Scottish mums are more likely to die early and obese Scots have 
    been left off the records for years – by accident. Poor urban Scots 
    reach intensive care faster than healthier Scots and the cost of 
    sickness benefits here is one-third higher than in the rest of the 
    UK.
Last week’s headlines prove that despite some improvements, 
    Scotland is still the sick man and woman of Europe.
But how have the authorities reacted to this little nosegay of 
    misery? With buck-passing and statements of the obvious.
Stirling University researchers say higher sickness benefit 
    costs arise from Scotland’s poor health record whereby would-be 
    workers claim sickness benefits rather than working. “Health 
    experts” say people need more education, UK ministers say the 
    higher cost of sickness welfare in Scotland proves we are “Better 
    Together” while Scottish ministers say lower welfare costs in other 
    sectors mean an independent Scotland could easily cope.
Talk about fiddling while Rome burns. Does no-one want to tackle 
    the Big Question?
Why are Scots sicker than the rest of the UK? Have poor health 
    and premature death become totems of Scottish identity we have 
    learned to live with? 
If so, we better unlearn fast and question far more than the NHS 
    or our own dodgy health habits.
In 2009-10, the NHS in Scotland spent almost £1.5 billion on 
    emergency admissions of old people – the majority of whom had no 
    serious clinical problem. Some had a minor fall, felt unwell or 
    were in pain. None were really “medical emergencies”. But without 
    support in their own locality, they were taken to hospital to be on 
    the safe side.
That’s an admission of social and systemic failure. Once in a 
    hospital bed, those old people stay.
Health finds the cash to keep them while housing cannot find the 
    funding for adaptations to let them go home, community care cannot 
    fund the professionals to drop by, children cannot afford the time 
    and no politician will seriously consider the massive shift of 
    resources and power to community level that might break this 
    vicious circle.
Good public health is a product of good social and democratic 
    health. We lack vitality in all three areas. Public money is 
    trapped in professional silos. And yet years after the Christie 
    Commission, those barriers are still going strong.
Things will get worse. Health professionals estimate our ageing 
    population requires the construction of a hospital every 18 months. 
    That cannot be afforded – and shouldn’t even be contemplated.
Instead, we need a new non-medicalised, non-professional-led 
    vision of health where equality and empowerment are recognised as 
    the most important public health issues – not afterthoughts.
Dr Phil Hanlon and researchers at the Centre for Population 
    Health have compared life, incomes and health outcomes in Glasgow, 
    Liverpool and Manchester. They found “deprivation profiles” were 
    almost identical, but premature deaths in Glasgow were 30 per cent 
    higher. 
This excess mortality ran across almost all ages, males and 
    females and deprived and non-deprived neighbourhoods. Why? 
    Surprisingly, lung cancer, heart and liver disease were not the 
    factors tipping Glaswegians over the UK average (although compared 
    to healthier European neighbours no part of Britain fares well).
Higher levels of drug and alcohol misuse, suicide and death 
    through violence account for almost all of Glasgow’s “excess” 
    deaths. Which begs the next question: why are some Glaswegians so 
    prone to self-harming and life-shortening behaviours?
There’s no easy answer, and absolutely none that sits 
    conveniently within the confines of medical science alone.
Chief Medical Officer Harry Burns cites the work of Aaron 
    Antonovsky, who maintained that a sense of coherence (SOC) is 
    necessary for adult health.
The Israeli medical sociologist defined the SOC as “the 
    extent to which one has a feeling of confidence that the stimuli 
    deriving from one’s internal and external environments are 
    structured, predictable and explicable, that one has the internal 
    resources to meet the demands posed by these stimuli and, finally, 
    that these demands are seen as challenges, worthy of investment and 
    engagement”.
In other words, good health is a mixture of optimism and control 
    that relies on life being comprehensible, manageable and 
    meaningful.
Comprehensibility allows people to perceive events as ordered, 
    consistent, and structured. Manageability allows people to feel 
    they can cope. Meaning allows life to make sense, and challenges to 
    seem worthy of commitment.
So what is stopping deprived Glaswegians in particular from 
    seeing structure and order in their world or regarding their own 
    lives as worthwhile challenges?
Some think it’s the grief and hopelessness created when Margaret 
    Thatcher dismantled the craft-base of the Clyde. Some think it’s 
    the absence of engaged, consistent parenting which inhibits the 
    life chances of each successive generation in areas of multiple 
    deprivation. I’d suggest there are two other political ingredients 
    in Scotland’s deadly health cocktail.
The first is rigid inequality – if you live in Scotland’s 10 per 
    cent poorest neighbourhoods you are five times more likely to 
    experience crime, twice as likely to have health problems resulting 
    in emergency hospital admission and your kids will score only half 
    the combined academic results of their more affluent peers. 
In Scotland each important aspect of living (and public 
    spending) is correlated with background. Life chances, performance 
    and outcomes are high in rich neighbourhoods, low in poor ones. Not 
    loosely, randomly or occasionally, but absolutely, always and 
    rigidly. Not last century but right now.
The second health-inhibiting factor is a paternalistic, top-down 
    society.
Cash, power, jobs and status – all the tools needed for healing 
    – are retained at the professional heart of Scottish life, not its 
    disempowered localities. Scots have deferred to doctors, lawyers, 
    teachers, professors and other experts for so long we now believe 
    professionals alone can fix broken people. Instead, an 
    over-reliance on professionals is part of the reason sick Scots 
    cannot fix themselves.
Scotland cannot flourish while so many people are stuck in 
    mapped-out, meaningless lives they cannot improve, with the power 
    only to self-medicate using painkillers, drugs, booze or food.
A completely new “whole society” approach is needed because 
    nothing less will shift the structurally embedded patterns of 
    Scotland’s ill health. I realise that’s a taller order than 
    point-scoring over independence, but surely that’s what the 
    Scottish Parliament is really for. 
