Polish atheists mount billboard challenge to Catholic 
    Church 

For decades Poland’s Catholic Church enjoyed a 
    commanding role in society, with few challenges to a role and 
    influence that for many Poles is sacrosanct and an inseparable 
    aspect of Polish identity.
But now a series of billboards sponsored by atheist 
    organisations mushrooming around the country has thrown down a very 
    public challenge.
One of the giant placards that have started to appear in major 
    Polish cities show a series of boxes labelled “Do Not 
    Kill,” “Do Not Steal,” “Do Not 
    Believe”. Each box is ticked. Another billboard asks the 
    question “Don’t believe in God?” and provides the 
    answer: “You are not alone”.
The arrival of the billboards has generated a whirlwind of 
    publicity in a nation where more than 90 per cent of the population 
    still classifies itself as Catholic, and is also the birthplace of 
    Pope John Paul II, pictured below, one of Poland’s most famous 
    sons.
“In a country considered to be Catholic, it’s very hard 
    to be an atheist,” said Jacek Tabisz, president of the 
    Polish Association of Rationalists, one of the organisations 
    responsible for the boards. “Contrary to popular belief, 
    however, there are many of us although not all of us have let our 
    beliefs be known.
“The billboard action is not aimed at believers,” 
    he added. “It is to show people that in a country where the 
    stereotypical Pole is a Catholic there is a large group of 
    atheists.”
The campaign has fed into a widening and in many ways 
    unprecedented debate in Poland over the position and power of the 
    Catholic Church in the country.
Long revered as a bastion of Polish culture and mores, when 
    communism collapsed in 1989 a combination of widespread belief and 
    gratitude to the Church for its role in the downfall of Communism 
    led to the state granting it a number of privileges.
Despite being an officially secular state, priests can give 
    classes in “religion” from kindergarten age upwards, and the Church 
    benefits from the “Church fund”, a raft of supportive financial 
    measures from tax relief and help with pensions, to state funding 
    for ecclesiastical property.
For the best part of two decades these rights, along with the 
    Church’s revered status, have gone almost unchallenged but now 
    times are changing.
Last week, the Palikot Movement, the third largest party in the 
    Polish parliament and one with a clear anti-clerical agenda, called 
    for an end to religious instruction in schools, claiming it 
    contravened articles in the Polish constitution ensuring equality 
    of all faiths. 
Even the Polish government has courted a share of criticism from 
    the Church, with talk of reforming and reducing the “Church 
    fund”.
Going one step further last month the government also ignored 
    strident objections from the Catholic Church when it approved state 
    funding for in-vitro fertilisation programmes. 
Sociologists quell talk of an anti-clerical revolution in 
    Poland, pointing out that despite the challenges to the Church’s 
    position the Central European state remains a robustly Catholic 
    country.
But they also stress that as Poles travel, work abroad and are 
    exposed to a more cosmopolitan and more secular lifestyle the once 
    formidable power and influence of the Church has begun to wane. 
