Computer games benefit kids, new research shows
CHILDREN who play on computer games for up to an hour a day are 
    better behaved, researchers have found.
They discovered that youngsters who indulged in a little 
    game-playing were associated with being better adjusted than those 
    who had never played or those who did so for three hours or more 
    each day.
The Oxford University study suggests the influence on children 
    of games consoles such as Nintendo Wii and Sony Playstation is 
    "very small" when compared with more "enduring" 
    factors such as schooling and wealth.
The research found no positive or negative effects for young 
    people who played "moderately" – ie, between one to three 
    hours a day. However, the study in the journal Paediatrics 
    suggested video games’ influence is very small compared to whether 
    the child is from a functioning family, their school relationships, 
    and whether they are materially deprived.
The study is the first to examine both the positive and negative 
    effects of gaming using a sample of 5,000 young people.
Participants aged 10-15 years were asked how much time they 
    typically spent on console-based or computer-based games. They also 
    answered questions about how satisfied they were with their lives, 
    their levels of hyperactivity and inattention; empathy; and how 
    they got on with their peers.
Researchers found three in four British youngsters played video 
    games on a daily basis, and those who spent more than half their 
    daily free time gaming were not as well adjusted.
They say this could be due to missing out on other activities 
    and possibly exposing themselves to inappropriate content designed 
    for adults.
However, when compared to non-players and those who played a 
    lot, those who played video games for less than an hour – estimated 
    to be less than one-third of their daily free time – had the 
    highest levels of sociability and were most likely to be satisfied 
    in their lives.
They also appeared to have fewer friendship and emotional 
    problems, and reported less hyperactivity than others.
Study author Dr Andrew Przybylski, of the Oxford Internet 
    Institute, said: “These results support recent 
    laboratory-based experiments that have identified the downsides to 
    playing electronic games.
“However, high levels of video game-playing appear to be 
    only weakly linked to children’s behavioural problems in the real 
    world.
“Likewise, the small, positive effects we observed for 
    low levels of play on electronic games do not support the idea that 
    video games on their own can help children develop in an 
    increasingly digital world.
“Some of the positive effects identified in past gaming 
    research were mirrored in these data, but the effects were quite 
    small, suggesting that any benefits may be limited to a narrow 
    range of action games.”
He added: “Further research needs to be carried out. It 
    will also be important to identify how social environments such as 
    family, peers and the community shape how gaming experiences 
    influence young people.”
Previous research recommended time limits, but this study argued 
    that such guidelines had little scientific basis.
