'Hipster hotspots' push up house prices in 
    Edinburgh and Glasgow

Major cities across Britain are becoming home to "hipster 
    hotspots" - pushing up house prices strongly in places such as 
    Bristol, Manchester and Edinburgh as well as in London - research 
    has found.
Property website Zoopla looked into the impact on house prices 
    in areas which have attracted new generations of creative, 
    upwardly-mobile people. Some neighbourhoods have become more 
    "gentrified" as younger generations of home buyers have 
    found themselves priced out of the areas nearby.
Dalston in East London was identified by Zoopla as the top 
    hipster hotspot, with property prices there having typically 
    increased by nearly 60% over the past five years, now averaging 
    £633,593. 
While London's Shoreditch, Stratford, Tooting and Stoke 
    Newington were also identified as having seen strong house price 
    growth, Zoopla found that away from London, property values in 
    other cities' suburbs have also surged as their popularity has 
    grown.
Montpelier in Bristol, which has previously been dubbed one of 
    the "coolest" places to live in Britain, has seen 
    property price growth of nearly 40% across the last five years.
Meanwhile, Chorlton in Manchester has seen house prices increase 
    by 28% over the past five years. And in Wales, Penarth, with its 
    seaside views and close proximity to Cardiff making it a popular 
    location for young professionals, has seen property values jump by 
    23% since 2011.
Birmingham was also identified as a hipster hotspot, with 
    property values in the Jewellery Quarter having increased by 31% 
    over the past five years.
And in Leith in the Edinburgh area, house prices have increased 
    by 13% since 2011. Glasgow's Finnieston has also seen property 
    values increase by 20% over the past five years. 
Lawrence Hall, a spokesman for Zoopla, said: "As 
    cities change shape and property prices continue to climb, it is 
    inevitable that run-down areas are revived to accommodate growing 
    resident numbers, resulting in new trendy hotspots starting to 
    appear.
"Given London's population and size, and the 
    city's ongoing gentrification process, it's not 
    surprising to see the capital's edgy enclaves dominating the 
    hipster hotspot rankings.
"With gentrification happening across UK cities, we 
    have seen a shift in price for these areas over the past five years 
    as well as a new set of residents for these hotpots in these 
    ever-growing cities."
Here are Britain's top 10 hipster hotspots by house price 
    growth, according to Zoopla, with the average percentage increase 
    in property prices since 2011 and the average property price in 
    2016:
1. Dalston, London, 59.89% £633,593
2. Shoreditch, London, 58.06%, £526,244 
