Background crucial factor in child development 

HOW does a child’s background influence their 
    development? A major ten year study released this week reveals the 
    significant extent of socio-economic differences in children’s 
    cognitive development and demonstrate how these can take effect as 
    early as age three.
How successfully children, learn, remember, problem-solve, and 
    learn to speak are important indicators of their development in the 
    early years and strong predictors of how they will fair at school 
    and even beyond, in further or higher education and the world of 
    work. Together these aspects of children’s learning are known as 
    their cognitive development.

For the last ten years ScotCen Social Research has been running 
    the Growing up in Scotland study (GUS), a survey-led project which 
    follows the lives of two groups of Scottish children: the first 
    born in 2005 and the second in 2011. In total around 10,000 
    families are involved.
Using the study we’re able to monitor how well children are 
    developing and identify where and why differences occur between 
    children from different backgrounds. Monitoring children’s 
    cognitive development is crucial because it’s such an important 
    predictor of later outcomes at school and beyond. It’s also 
    possible and more straightforward to address language delay when 
    children are younger than it is when children are older, and 
    improvements at young age are likely to lead to improved outcomes 
    later.
Signs that some children are likely to do better than others as 
    result of the environment they grow up in are a concern for parents 
    and policy-makers. They’re indicative of social inequality and show 
    that efforts to offer all children the best start in life aren’t 
    yet fully addressing the disadvantage many children face because of 
    the socio-economic characteristics of their parents. Nevertheless, 
    collecting data to better understand and address this disadvantage 
    is an important step.
GUS can examine inequality using a range of indicators such as 
    area deprivation, parental level of education or household income. 
    For example, data from the study’s group of children born in 2010 
    shows that at age three children in Scotland living in the least 
    deprived areas had higher average cognitive ability scores than 
    those living in most deprived areas for both vocabulary and problem 
    solving. On average, children from the least deprived areas scored 
    53 for vocabulary and 47 for problem solving compared with 46 and 
    44 respectively for children from the most deprived areas. The 
    average scores for all three year olds were 50 for vocabulary and 
    46 for problem solving.

Parental educational backgrounds are particularly 
    differentiating on these measures. Again looking at scores at age 
    three, children whose parents had no formal qualifications scored 
    45 on average when tested on their vocabulary development, compared 
    with an average of 53 amongst children whose parents had 
    degrees.
Household income is also related to children’s vocabulary and 
    problem solving ability. Three year olds from the lowest income 
    households scored lower on vocabulary and problem solving than 
    those in the highest income households - average scores of 48 and 
    53 respectively for vocabulary and 44 and 48 for problem 
    solving.
These inequalities are stark and data from Growing up in 
    Scotland is helping policymakers understand what might be done to 
    address them. For example, the study has shown that activities such 
    as being read to every day at 10 months and being actively involved 
    in daily home learning activities (such as singing nursery rhymes 
    or painting and drawing at 22 months) are significantly related to 
    better vocabulary ability at age three even after taking account of 
    socio-economic backgrounds.
These kinds of home learning activities, which have little to no 
    monetary cost, can moderate the effects of socio-economic 
    background and help improve the early outcomes of those most 
    disadvantaged – setting them up for better outcomes in later life. 
    Thus better supporting parents with more informed policy making 
    using findings such as those from GUS will no doubt lead to 
    positive changes.

