British class system ‘fragmented’, says study 

BRITISH people no longer fit into three social 
    classes, with only one in seven in the “traditional working class”, 
    a new study has suggested.
Researchers found the established model of an upper class, 
    middle class and working class has “fragmented” and there are now 
    seven classes ranging from the “elite” to the “precariat”. 
The UK’s “elite” – just 6 per cent of the population – have 
    savings of more than £140,000, extensive social contacts and were 
    educated at top universities, according to the BBC’s online Great 
    British Class Survey. More than 160,000 respondents took part in 
    the survey, the largest of its kind in the UK.
Representing 15 per cent of the population, the “precariat” earn 
    just £8,000 after tax and have average savings of £800, with fewer 
    than one in 30 gaining a university education. 
Professor Mike Savage, of the London School of Economics and 
    Political Science (LSE), carried out the research with Professor 
    Fiona Devine, of the University of Manchester, with the help of BBC 
    Lab UK.
Prof Savage said: “It is striking that we have been able 
    to discern a distinctive elite, whose sheer economic advantage sets 
    it apart from other classes.
“At the opposite extreme, we have discerned the existence 
    of a sizeable group – 15 per cent of the population – which is 
    marked by the lack of any significant amount of economic, cultural 
    or social capital.
“The recognition of the existence of this group, along 
    with the elite, is a powerful reminder that our conventional 
    approaches to class have hindered our recognition of these two 
    extremes, which occupy a very distinctive place in British 
    society.”
Researchers found the “traditional working class” has fallen to 
    just 14 per cent of the total population, and “is fading 
    from contemporary importance”.
At one in four of the population, the “established middle class” 
    is the largest group, with household income of £47,000 and 
    “highbrow” tastes. 
Beneath them is the “technical middle class”, largely made up of 
    researchers, scientists and those in technical professions.
The average age for this group is 52, with members tending to 
    live in suburban areas, often in the south-east of England.
Below the technical middle class and above the traditional 
    working class is the group known as “new affluent workers”. This 
    group has an average age of 44 and is made up of those who are 
    economically secure without being well-off.
The “emergent service workers” are the final 
    group and the youngest, with a mean age of 34 and high proportions 
    of ethnic minorities.
Prof Devine said: “It’s what’s in the middle which is 
    really interesting and exciting. There’s a much more fuzzy area 
    between the traditional working class and traditional middle 
    class.
“There’s the emergent workers and the new affluent 
    workers, who are different groups of people who won’t necessarily 
    see themselves as working or middle class.”
The researchers asked questions about people’s leisure 
    interests, musical tastes, use of the media and food preferences to 
    help build a picture of Britain’s cultural consumption.
They also used a “position generator” developed by the American 
    sociologist Nan Lin in 2001 to measure the range of people’s social 
    ties, asking participants whether they knew anyone in 37 different 
    occupations. 
Information was also gathered on household income, household 
    savings and the value of participants’ homes. The combined 
    information was used to make a “score” which represented each 
    participant’s economic capital. 
The findings were presented at a conference of the British 
    Sociological Association yesterday, and will be published in this 
    month’s Sociology Journal. 
