Scots are displaying a more tolerant streak 
The Pride Edinburgh festival marks its 
    21st birthday in July 2016. 
Figures from ScotCen’s annual Scottish Social Attitudes (SSA) 
    survey have shown a significant reduction in the prevalence of 
    discriminatory attitudes in Scotland since 2010, with levels of 
    prejudice towards LGBT people in particular falling sharply. 
The proportion of people who say that they would be unhappy if a 
    close relative married someone of the same sex has almost halved 
    from 30% in 2010 to 16% in 2015, whilst the number who say they 
    would be unhappy if a relative married someone who has undergone 
    gender reassignment surgery has fallen from around a half to just 
    under a third over the same period. Further, whilst 55% of 
    respondents stated that they would be unhappy if a relative married 
    someone who cross-dresses in public in 2010, 39% were of this 
    inclination in 2015. 
The number of people who believe that someone who is gay or 
    lesbian, or has undergone gender reassignment surgery, is 
    unsuitable to be a primary school teacher has also fallen 
    considerably during this timeframe. This shift in attitudes is 
    particularly notable in relation to the latter group; between 2010 
    and 2015, the proportion of people who said that those who have 
    undergone gender reassignment are not suitable to teach at primary 
    school level fell by 11 percentage points. 
These changes have occurred in tandem with a rise in the number 
    of Scots who think that sexual relations between two adults of the 
    same sex are ‘rarely’ or ‘never’ wrong, from 58% in 2010 to 69% in 
    2015. Taken together, these figures may suggest a broader shift in 
    people’s attitudes towards those who challenge traditional norms of 
    gender, sexuality and relationships. 
A closer look at the data shows that the biggest attitudinal 
    change has occurred among those socio-demographic groups that have 
    previously been more likely to hold discriminatory views about LGBT 
    people. Increasing acceptance of a relative marrying a person who 
    has undergone gender reassignment surgery for example has occurred 
    particularly amongst those with no formal educational 
    qualifications, whilst the drop in disapproval of a relative 
    marrying someone of the same sex is also marked amongst those in 
    older age groups who typically hold more socially conservative 
    views. Whilst the drivers behind these changes are complex, it may 
    be the case that those groups amongst which levels of prejudice had 
    previously been comparatively high have been influenced by wider 
    shifts in attitudes across the rest of society. 
Despite highlighting the significant progress that has been made 
    towards social equality for LGBT people in Scotland, these figures 
    also show that relatively high levels of prejudice towards certain 
    groups persist, particularly those who cross-dress in public or 
    have undergone gender reassignment surgery. Although positive 
    changes in public attitudes have clearly taken place, there remains 
    work to be done to ensure that no-one in Scotland is subject to 
    discrimination as a result of their sexuality or gender identity. 
    
