 28% of P7 pupils ‘not achieving required levels of 
    literacy’ 
Only 72 per cent of Primary seven 
    children in Scotland meet the standard. 
The Scottish Government’s education record was under 
    fresh attack tonight after new figures showed over one quarter of 
    children do not meet literacy and numeracy standards when leaving 
    primary school. 
Scottish Government statistics looking at the SNP’s flagship 
    Curriculum for Excellence (CfE) policy also highlighted yawning 
    attainment gap, which sees pupils from wealthier backgrounds 
    outperform their poorer counterparts. 
The publication of the figures comes a week after it emerged 
    Scotland’s schools had recorded their worst-ever performance in the 
    latest set of Programme for International Student Assessment (Pisa) 
    test. 
Today’s figures revealed that 72 per cent of primary seven 
    pupils achieved the required level for reading down from 75 per 
    cent in primary four and 81 per cent in primary one. 
The figures were worse when it came to writing with more than 
    one third failing to reach the required standard. 
Just 65 per cent of primary seven pupils reached the required 
    level for writing, a decline from the 69 per cent achieved in 
    primary four and the 78 per cent recorded in primary one. 
A total of 68 per cent of those in the final year of primary 
    school reached the standard for numeracy, a fall from the 73 per 
    cent in primary four and the 84 per cent in primary one. 
The standard of “listening and talking” was higher with 77 per 
    cent reaching the required standard. 
Nicola Sturgeon has made closing the attainment gap the key 
    priority of her Government. But the Curriculum for Excellence 
    figures highlighted the work that needs to be done. 
For each area, a higher proportion of pupils living in the 
    least-deprived areas achieve the CfE level relevant to their stage 
    compared to pupils living in the most-deprived areas. 
The gap between pupils from the 20 per cent most-deprived areas 
    and those from the least-deprived areas for writing at primary 
    seven is 23 per cent, for example. 
When it came to writing 78 per cent of those from the most 
    affluent areas achieved the standard compared with just 54 per cent 
    from the poorest areas. Similar findings were recorded for reading 
    with 84 per cent of primary seven children from rich areas reaching 
    the standard compared with 63 per cent recorded by those from poor 
    areas. 
When it came to numeracy 80 per cent of primary seven pupils 
    from the wealthiest areas performed to the required standard 
    compared with 58 per cent in the most deprived areas. 
The figures also revealed that the gap between academic 
    standards reached by those from differing backgrounds became wider 
    and as children went through the primary school system. 
At secondary school the figures identified a disparity between 
    S3 results across the country. While 97 per cent of S3 pupils in 
    East Dunbartonshire were reaching the required standard (level 3) 
    or above in numeracy, only 58 per cent were reaching that level in 
    Clackmannanshire. And while 98 per cent of pupils in East 
    Dunbartonshire were reaching level 3 or above in writing, only 67 
    per cent of pupils were reaching the same level in Aberdeen. 
Education Secretary John Swinney defended his government’s 
    record by arguing that the number of teachers now stood at 50,970 
    teachers in 2016, an increase of 253 full-time equivalent on the 
    previous year. 
His opponents, however, argued that teacher numbers were 
    thousands below the levels they were when the SNP first came to 
    power, with 3,616 fewer secondary teachers and 4,113 fewer teachers 
    overall compared to 2007.Scottish 
    Conservative shadow education secretary Liz Smith said: 
    “These statistics are more proof if any was needed that the 
    attainment gap in Scotland is a wide as ever. It’s clear from these 
    figures that there are massive issues in delivering CfE in some 
    areas of the country, and that the confusion surrounding its 
    implementation is starting to have a hugely negative 
    effect.” 
She added: “With teacher numbers having plummeted from 
    the levels they were at a decade ago, it once again calls into 
    question whether the CfE can be delivered properly. ”Labour 
    Education spokesperson Iain Gray said: “The SNP’s school 
    shame has deepened with these statistics. The scale of their ten 
    years of failure becomes more apparent by the day. We have seen 
    huge cuts to teacher numbers, support staff, and investment per 
    pupil alongside increasing class sizes. As a result, the attainment 
    gap between the richest and the rest in Scotland is simply 
    scandalous. Pupils not reaching expected standards in reading, 
    writing and numeracy is a failure in social and economic policy by 
    the SNP government.” 
Mr Swinney said: “I very much welcome the rise in teacher 
    numbers compared to last year. 
“We can also see that class sizes are broadly stable and 
    the pupil-teacher ratio has been maintained. This is all good news, 
    particularly when you consider the teacher recruitment challenges 
    being faced in some areas. 
“The initial teacher judgement data, published today for 
    the very first time, illuminates progress being made in different 
    parts of the country and by children in our least and most deprived 
    areas. 
“These figures shine a light on where excellence already 
    exists and where there is more to do, both to target resources and 
    to ensure that children are getting the right support at the right 
    time. 
“They come ahead of the introduction of standardised 
    assessments next year and provide a basis upon which to build our 
    knowledge about how children are progressing at school. 
“The wide variation in some of the data does, however, 
    highlight the value that standardised assessment will 
    bring. 
“Currently there are inconsistencies in the way young 
    people’s progress is being assessed and reported in schools across 
    the country. 
“The standardised assessments will provide teachers with 
    nationally consistent data to help inform their professional 
    judgement.” 
