Edinburgh: the most selective education system in the 
    UK?

A new analysis today reveals the full extent of Edinburgh's 
    segregated school system and casts doubt on whether the city can 
    claim to be delivering genuine comprehensive education.  
 
Over 40% of Edinburgh’s state secondaries have been dominated by 
    pupils from prosperous areas, reflecting a catchment system that 
    rewards parents who can afford to move to better areas.
And 30% of the city's secondaries were dominated by school 
    leavers from poorer parts of the Capital.
At Westminster, Prime Minister Theresa May sparked fury after 
    she supported a new generation of grammar schools, which select 
    pupils on the basis of ability at the age of eleven.  

Politicians in Scotland attacked the policy and backed 
    comprehensives, which are non-selective and supposed to include 
    pupils from a range of backgrounds.
However, statistics from Education Scotland – a quango that 
    inspects schools and takes the lead on the curriculum – raises 
    questions about the inclusivity of Edinburgh secondaries.
It is widely known that around 25 per cent of pupils in the 
    capital attend independent schools. Middle class parents also 
    commandeer places in Edinburgh’s top state secondaries by moving 
    into a desirable catchment area.
The quango’s figures reveal the way the catchment system 
    entrenches social division and leaves behind a lottery for everyone 
    else.
Education Scotland provides a school-by-school breakdown of 
    school leavers from 2014/15 and where they live.
The quango relies on five categories in the 2012 Scottish Index 
    of Multiple Deprivation (SIMD) to map out where the leavers are 
    based: on a sliding scale, SIMD 1 includes the most deprived parts 
    of Scotland; and SIMD 5 encompasses the most affluent areas.
In seven of Edinburgh’s twenty-three secondaries, over 60% of 
    the 2014/15 leavers were in either SIMD 1 or 2.
In ten schools, over 60% of the leavers lived in the wealthier 
    SIMD 4 and 5 parts of the city.
At Boroughmuir High, 87% were from SIMD 4 and 5, while less than 
    10% of leavers were from the two categories at the other end of the 
    spectrum.  

James Gillespie’s High School, a five-minute walk from from 
    Boroughmuir, was similar: 78% came from the top two SIMD groups, 
    but only 14% of school leavers were from SIMD 1 and 2.
However, in the neighbouring catchment serving Castlebrae 
    Community High School, up to 93% of school leavers were located in 
    SIMD 1 and 2. The figure was less than 5% for the least deprived 
    categories.
Craigroyston Community High School in the north of the city 
    paints a similar picture: up to 80% of school leavers were from 
    poorer areas, while less than 5% came from SIMD 4 and 5.
At the Wester Hailes Education Centre (WHEC), 88% of leavers 
    were judged to be from the bottom two deprivation categories. Not a 
    single school leaver was from SIMD 4 or 5.
Ten of the city’s 23 secondary schools - including Forrester 
    High, which educated Deputy First Minister John Swinney - have 
    fewer than 15% of their school leavers from the most wealthy SIMD 
    group.  
Caveats apply to the figures: SIMD is based on geographical 
    areas and not does identify people. A poor person can be based in a 
    wealthy area, while a middle income earner can live in a relatively 
    deprived part of the city.
However, the data appears to confirm that educational outcomes 
    in Edinburgh are heavily influenced by where you live and whether 
    you have the finances to move into a wealthier catchment.
At Boroughmuir, James Gillespie’s and the Royal High School, the 
    proportion of leavers in 2014/15 who achieved Level 5 or better at 
    literacy and numeracy was 73%, 67% and 72%.  

By contrast, the figures for Castlebrae, Craigroyston and WHEC 
    were 21%, 24% and 20%.
Lucy Hunter Blackburn, a researcher at Edinburgh University and 
    education specialist, said: “Having a system that is so 
    socially segregated sets very high challenges for ensuring there’s 
    a genuinely comprehensive system, in which every child, no matter 
    where they live, gets the same educational opportunity and 
    experience.”
Keir Bloomer, the chair of Reform Scotland’s Commission on 
    School Reform, said: “If it could be established that 
    attending a school with a high proportion of disadvantaged pupils 
    holds back individual children, then effective action is needed. 
    This is where the Attainment Challenge should be concentrating. 
    Bussing [moving children by bus from one area to another to achieve 
    greater equality] is not a solution in a democratic society. What, 
    therefore, can be done to to ameliorate the impact of disadvantage 
    in schools where it is concentrated? This has to do with providing 
    better targeted, personalised, culturally enriched education in 
    such schools.”
Councillor Paul Godzik, the Convener of the Education, Children 
    & Families Committee at Edinburgh Council, said: “All 
    Edinburgh schools cater for the full range of young people who 
    attend. Every school in the Capital has children affected by 
    poverty and the outcomes for pupils through positive destinations 
    and exam statistics are continuing to rise. However it is our 
    declared intention to continue to close the gap for those young 
    people who are disadvantaged by poverty and we want all children to 
    get the best possible start in life.”
