Rich are four times more likely to go to university than 
    the poor 

Young people from working class homes in Scotland are 
    far less likely to go to university than their middle class peers 
    due to a “shocking access gap” which has not narrowed in 20 years, 
    a report has found.
A report by the Sutton Trust, an educational charity which seeks 
    to promote social mobility, said Scots from relatively affluent 
    homes are four times more likely to go university than those from 
    more deprived backgrounds – the biggest gap of anywhere in the 
    UK.
The research, which was carried out by academics at Edinburgh 
    University, found there had been no narrowing of the gap between 
    those from working class and middle class homes since 1996.
It said virtually all the growth in higher education places in 
    Scotland over the last decade had been provided by colleges not 
    universities.
It also found large differences in the profile of Scotland’s 
    four “ancient” universities, with Edinburgh and Glasgow taking 
    greater numbers of those from disadvantaged backgrounds than 
    Aberdeen and St Andrews. Umbrella body Universities Scotland said a 
    strict cap on places which allows Scots to receive free tuition had 
    made it harder for those north of the Border to win a place in 
    higher education.
The Sutton Trust study, Access in Scotland, which was led by 
    Professor Sheila Riddell, analysed official data from the Higher 
    Education Statistics Agency.
It found 90 per cent of all growth in those first entering 
    Scottish higher education has been through “sub-degree” courses in 
    colleges.
While Scots are more likely than their English counterparts to 
    enter some form of higher education, they are less likely to go 
    straight to university, with many “articulating” through 
    college.
In 2013-14, 55 per cent of Scots entered higher education by the 
    age of 30, with 20.9 per cent starting 
    at a further education college and 34.1 
    per cent going straight to university after school.
In England 46.6 per cent went to 
    university, with just 6 per cent of those moving on from 
    college.
Despite improvements in recent years, those from more affluent 
    backgrounds are four times more likely to go to university than 
    those from more disadvantaged areas, compared to 
    2.4 times as likely in England and three 
    times in Wales and Northern Ireland.
However, poorer Scots are more likely to enter leading Russell 
    Group institutions, members of a self-selected association of 24 
    public research universities, than their English ­counterparts.
The study said a decision by the Scottish Government to award 
    720 additional places at ancient universities to the poorest 
    students had been “particularly important”.
Sir Peter Lampl, chairman of the Sutton Trust, said Scotland 
    faced a “shocking access gap”.
He called for an independent commissioner to be appointed to 
    look at the issue, as well as more weight to be given to 
    “contextual admissions”, where an applicant’s background is 
    considered alongside their grades.
Professor Riddell said: “Despite free tuition, the 
    Scottish university sector has much work to do in order to realise 
    the goal of fair access.
“This report sheds new light on the problem, in 
    particular highlighting an over-reliance on the Scottish college 
    sector to increase participation rates overall and, in particular, 
    for students from disadvantaged backgrounds. The report also notes 
    that the supply of university places in Scotland has not kept pace 
    with rising demand, with detrimental consequences for less 
    advantaged students.”
First Minister Nicola Sturgeon has made education and reducing 
    the so-called “attainment gap” between middle and working class 
    homes a key priority of her government, appointing her deputy John 
    Swinney as education secretary.
But Scottish Labour’s education spokesman, Iain Gray, said it 
    was the SNP’s record in government that was letting down poorer 
    students.
He said: “This report shows that the SNP record on 
    colleges – 152,000 fewer college students, poor student support and 
    botched mergers which staff say has done nothing to improve 
    teaching – is letting down many of the poorest students who can get 
    into higher education.
“Nicola Sturgeon says that education is her top priority, 
    she has put her best minister in charge and devoted plenty of warm 
    words to it. The question now is whether there is any substance 
    behind this or if it is all just spin. Any government that is 
    serious about education would protect education 
    spending.”
Tory education spokeswoman Liz Smith added: “This report 
    lays bare two key points. Firstly, the Scottish Government’s policy 
    of capped places has made it more difficult for domiciled Scots to 
    get into university.
“Secondly, while there is some limited progress in 
    Scotland, it is not as good as in other parts of the UK, and that 
    partly reflects the fact there is a much lower base of bursary 
    support than in the rest of the UK.”
The National Union of Students said the Sutton Trust 
    report highlighted the need for “radical” reform, with a need for 
    more financial support to be put in place to support students to 
    stay in higher education.”
