1. Introduction
The incidence of acute pancreatitis (AP) varies between 
    populations ranging from 150 and 420 patients per million 
    population in the UK to 330–430 patients per million in the USA 
    [1,2]. One in five patients, however, will develop organ failure 
    with or without local complications–a setting that defines severe 
    acute pancreatitis. Half of the deaths attributable to AP occur 
    within the first 7 days of admission [3], with the majority in the 
    first 3 days. Patients with severe AP who survive this first phase 
    of illness, particularly those with persistent SIRS or organ 
    failure [4], are at risk of developing secondary infection of 
    pancreatic necrosis. Mortality in patients with infected necrosis 
    and organ failure may reach 20–30% and an increased mortality is 
    seen with increasing age [5]. The aim of this paper is to discuss 
    the role of minimally invasive surgical intervention in severe 
    acute pancreatitis, provide a rationale for adopting either a 
    single or multimodality approach based on the often variable 
    clinical scenarios, and highlight potential complications.
2. Revised Atlanta Classification 2012
The 2012 Revised Atlanta Classification [6] divides acute 
    pancreatitis into three categories: mild, moderate, and severe 
    disease. These categories are based on the absence or presence of 
    local and/or systemic complications. In addition to disease 
    severity, early mortality is strongly associated with age and 
    comorbidity. Furthermore, the classification further categorizes 
    local complications on the basis of time from presentation 
    (<or>4 weeks) and on the presence of necrosis (Table 1).The 
    vast majority of acute fluid collections without necrosis will 
    resolve within 4 weeks and a persistent fluid collection with 
    minimal or no necrotic component (“pseudocyst”) is very rare. 
    Collections may be sterile or infected. The majority of 
    peripancreatic complications are therefore related to either acute 
    necrotic collections (<4 weeks) or walled-off pancreatic 
    necrosis (>4 weeks). This temporal separation is somewhat 
    arbitrary, as the clinical management and surgical approach are 
    determined by multifactorial individual patient factors. However, 
    this does serve to provide a timeline beyond which, if appropriate, 
    intervention should be delayed. A subsequent
Table 1: Local complications in acute 
    pancreatitis (2012 Revised Atlanta Classification).
addendum added a category of “critical” recognizing those 
    patients with sepsis and organ failure which was associated with 
    the highest mortality [7].
3. ‘‘Step Up’’ Management of Postacute Peripancreatic 
    Collections
Whilst the early management, rationale, timing, and technique of 
    early percutaneous catheter drainage within a “step-up” framework 
    have been discussed in previous sections, it is worth establishing 
    the basis on which pancreatic necrosectomy may be considered within 
    the minimally invasive era. Early debridement [8] has for many 
    years been associated with and 
    adverse outcome, in the absence of major (usually vascular) 
    complications, being considered current standard practice. Freeny 
    [9] and his colleagues in the 1990’s showed that aggressive 
    percutaneous sepsis control would promote recovery in the absence 
    of formal necrosectomy, and this finding was confirmed within the 
    PANTER trial [10] which demonstrated that 35% of patients with 
    established necrotic collections did not require any further 
    intervention over simple small diameter percutaneous catheter 
    drainage.Therefore, whilst a proportion of patients will recover 
    without requirement for enhanced drainage, the majority will 
    continue to exhibit signs of sepsis despite percutaneous catheter 
    drainage alone. There is consensus that in those patients with 
    persistent sepsis, a minimally invasive approach is preferred over 
    open surgical necrosectomy, as described by Bradley, Warshaw, and 
    Beger [11–13]. A number of “step-up” approaches have been 
    described, including percutaneous necrosectomy (MIRP) [14], 
    video-assisted retroperitoneal debridement (VARD) [15] and 
    endoscopic [16] and laparoscopic [17] cystgastrostomy. Laparoscopic 
    direct necrosectomy was described in the 1990’s [18] but failed to 
    gain popularity due to technical difficulty. There are 2 
    retrospective studies [19,20] describing laparoscopic necrosectomy 
    alone with a total of 29 patients. The patients were highly 
    selected and no median follow-up was available for either study. 
    The choice of one approach over another is determined by the 
    clinical condition of the patient, local experience and expertise, 
    anatomical position/content of the collection, and the time from 
    presentation/maturation of the wall of the collection. There is an 
    acceptance that due to the complexity of presentation, no single 
    technique is a panacea, and all options share a common concept of 
    achieving minimally invasive sepsis control, whilst maintaining 
    adequate nutritional competence. A detailed discussion surrounding 
    nutritional support is beyond the scope of this paper but focuses 
    on nasoenteric feeding [21] (NG or NJ), occasionally resorting to 
    dual feeding (NJ/TPN) if nutritional targets are not being met 
    enterically. Percutaneous gastrostomy or jejunostomy feeding tubes 
    were commonplace in the open surgical era but are associated with 
    procedure related complications which outweigh any advantage over 
    the nasoenteric route and are not used in our unit. The optimal 
    approach is developing through evolution and the management 
    concepts of the last decade, where solid predominant or infected 
    necrotic collections were managed percutaneously by MIRP or VARD 
    and well-organized predominantly fluid collections managed by 
    endoscopic orlaparoscopic transgastric drainage are now being 
    challenged in randomized trials.The choice of initial percutaneous 
    or endoscopic drainage is now largely based on the position of the 
    collection relative to the stomach, colon, liver, spleen, and 
    kidney. Furthermore, the ability to perform EUS guided puncture 
    within an ITU setting, without moving the patient to the radiology 
    department for CT guided drainage, may be safer in a patient in 
    extremis. In general, lateral collections and those extending 
    behind the colon are usually better approached from the left or 
    right flank whereas those medial collections where a percutaneous 
    route is compromised by overlying bowel, spleen, or liver, may be 
    better approached endoscopically. Initial percutaneous drainage is 
    with an 8–12 FG single pigtail at the discretion of the 
    radiologist, and catheter diameter or type does not seem to 
    influence the requirement for secondary intervention. The route of 
    percutaneous drainage should ideally take into account the 
    probability of subsequent “step-up” escalation utilizing that drain 
    tract, but the initial priority must be sepsis control, and if the 
    initial drain placement is suboptimal, secondary alternative access 
    can be obtained, sometimes involving a combination of percutaneous 
    and endoscopic techniques. Both MIRP and VARD retroperitoneal 
    techniques are modifications of the open lateral approach initially 
    described in the 1980’s by Fagniez et al. [22] which utilised a 
    loin/subcostal and retrocolic approach to allow debridement of 
    pancreatic and peripancreatic necrosis. This open approach was 
    associated with major morbidity (enteric fistula 45%, haemorrhage 
    40%, and colonic necrosis 15%) and failed to gain popularity. For 
    both minimally invasive techniques,
Figure 1: Acute walled-off pancreatic 
    necrotic collection (W. O. P. N) at 6 weeks.
a left-sided small diameter percutaneous drain is ideally placed 
    into the acute necrotic collection between the spleen, kidney, and 
    colon (Figure 1). Right-sided or transperitoneal drainage is also 
    possible. In those who fail to respond adequately to simple 
    drainage this access drain is then used as a guide to gain enhanced 
    drainage of the collection. For percutaneous necrosectomy, the 
    catheter is exchanged for a radiological guidewire and then a low 
    compliance balloon dilator is inserted into the collection and 
    dilated to 30 FG. Access to the cavity is achieved by passing the 
    operating nephroscope through an Amplatz sheath, which allows 
    debridement under direct vision. The nephroscopeh 
    as an operating channel that permits 
    standard (5 mm) laparoscopic graspers as well as an 
    irrigation/suction channel. High flow lavage promotes initial 
    evacuation of pus and liquefied necrotic material, exposing 
    residual black or grey devascularised pancreatic necrosis and 
    peripancreatic fat,which if loose is extracted in a piecemeal 
    fashion until, after several procedures, a cavity lined by viable 
    granulation tissue is created. At the end of the procedure an 8 FG 
    catheter sutured to a 24 FG drain is passed into the cavity to 
    allow continuous postoperative lavage of warm 0.9% normal saline 
    initially at 250 mls an hour (Figure 2). The subsequent rate of 
    lavage is determined by the return and can be reduced as the 
    effluent clears and the clinical control of sepsis is achieved. 
    Chemically assisted debridement with hydrogen peroxide has been 
    reported during endoscopic drainage [23], but concerns regarding 
    the risk of air embolism have been highlighted in previous studies 
    [24] and should only be considered within a study format. 
    Subsequent conversion of the lavage system to simple drainage may 
    be all that is required prior to recovery or the procedure may be 
    repeated until sepsis control is achieved and interval CT confirms 
    resolution. A video-assisted retroperitoneal debridement (VARD) 
    procedure is performed with the patient placed in a supine position 
    with the left side 30–40° elevated. A subcostal incision of 5 cm is 
    placed in the left flank at the midaxillary line, close to the exit 
    point of the percutaneous drain. Using the in 
    situ percutaneous drain as a guide the retroperitoneal 
    collection is entered. The cavity is cleared of purulent material 
    using a standard suction device. Visible necrosis is carefully 
    removed with the use of long grasping forceps, and deeper
Figure 2: Retroperitoneal drain 
    following enhanced “step-up” percutaneous necrosectomy in same 
    patient as in Figure 1.
access is facilitated using a 0° laparoscope, and further 
    debridement performed with laparoscopic forceps under videoscopic 
    assistance. As with a percutaneous necrosectomy, complete 
    necrosectomy is not the aim of this procedure and only loosely 
    adherent pieces of necrosis are removed, minimizing the risk of 
    haemorrhage.Two large bore single lumen drains are positioned in 
    the cavity and the fascia closed to facilitate a closed continuous 
    postoperative lavage system.
4. Early Procedure Related Complications
4.1. SIRS/Bacteraemia Requiring Critical Care 
    Support. Occasionally intervention is associated with a 
    significant SIRS or postprocedure bacteraemia, requiring critical 
    care admission for organ support and often vasopressor therapy. 
    This often resolves within 24–48 hours with appropriate supportive 
    management. Therefore if possible, it is often beneficial for these 
    patients to be observed in a critical care environment following 
    intervention, particularly if they were not receiving level two 
    care before procedure.

4.2. Acute or Delayed Haemorrhage. Probably 
    the most frequent scenario is brisk haemorrhage complicating early 
    or overenthusiastic necrosectomy. Attempts at open surgical 
    haemostasis are associated with significant mortality, and in this 
    setting control is usually achieved by packing, or balloon 
    tamponade, but emergency angiography may occasionally have to be 
    considered for arterial bleeding. Venous bleeding is common and 
    should be suspected in patients with a nondiagnostic angiogram but 
    usually settles with correction of any coagulopathy and with local 
    pressure, by simple drain occlusion, a modified 
    Sengstaken-Blakemore tube having amputated the gastric balloon 
    (MIRP), or gauze packing if there is sufficient cutaneous access 
    (VARD). Secondary haemorrhage is occasionally sudden and massive, 
    but here is usually a prelude with a “heraldbleed 
    ,” a self-terminating bleed 
    presenting clinically with haemorrhage into a retroperitoneal drain 
    or occasionally a gastrointestinal bleed. An arterial origin of 
    haemorrhage is more common than venous when this occurs as a 
    spontaneous secondary bleed. Overall, the mortality exceeds 30–40% 
    and a high index of suspicion is essential in order to optimise 
    proactive treatment. In our unit the patient is rapidly stabilized 
    with controlled volume support of the circulation and a 
    simultaneous emergency CT angiogram. Upper gastrointestinal 
    endoscopy in this setting is usually nondiagnostic so should not 
    delay radiological assessment which allows definitive management. 
    Where arterial bleeding is identified on formal angiography 
    embolisation offers the best chance of survival. The increased 
    intracavity pressure, associated with haemorrhage into an infected 
    cavity, may also often be followed by escalating organ dysfunction 
    through bacteraemia and sepsis; therefore early introduction of 
    targeted antimicrobials is essential.
4.3. Enteric Fistulation. Spontaneous 
    discharge of a postacute collection into the gastrointestinal tract 
    is also recognised which can decompress the collection and result 
    in a clinical improvement without intervention, usually where the 
    fistulous communication involved is the stomach or duodenum, 
    mimicking an endoscopic drainage. It can also present with 
    haematemesis or melaena and should be managed as described above. 
    Whilst spontaneous resolution is possible, fistulation into the 
    colon will often result in persistent sepsis and poorly controlled 
    collections, and therefore, in this situation a defunctioning 
    colostomy/ileostomy or resection may be necessary.
4.4. Late Complications
4.4.1. Pancreatic Fistulation. Parenchymal 
    necrosis is commonly associated with disruption of the main 
    pancreatic duct, and following resolution of associated sepsis 
    residual duct leakage of amylase rich fluid is common, leading to a 
    pancreatic fistula. Early endoscopic intervention should be 
    discouraged whilst collections remain as this may introduce 
    infection and usually prove detrimental. Following resolution of 
    sepsis and any significant collection, transpapillary pancreatic 
    duct stent insertion at ERCP may result in resolution of a 
    persistent fistula, but persistent drainage is often associated 
    with more extensive parenchymal loss or a disconnected tail (see 
    below). Prolonged catheter drainage will lead to maturation of the 
    fistula tract and interval drain removal may result in spontaneous 
    resolution or development of a postacute pseudocyst, which can 
    often be resolved by transmural endoscopic cystgastrostomy 
    achieving enteric diversion.
4.4.2. Disconnected Tail. Where the necrosis 
    extends across most of the transverse diameter of the body or tail, 
    complete separation of the main pancreatic duct in the head of the 
    pancreas and tail may occur leading to a persistent fistula and 
    “disconnected duct syndrome.” 
    Ductal occlusion at the level of parenchymal loss often precludes 
    transpapillary access but if this has not occurred, intracystic 
    transpapillary stenting may result in resolution. If transpapillary 
    access is not possible, options may be transmural EUS guided 
    drainage. Surgical options are dependent on the anatomy and degree 
    of anatomic distortion following resolution of the early phase of 
    disease [25] and include a formal pancreaticojejunostomy, 
    fistula-jejunostomy, or a “salvage” distal pancreatectomy to excise 
    the residual disconnected functional pancreatic parenchyma, often 
    in combination with a splenectomy, performing a limited 
    pancreatico- (fistula-) jejunostomy.
