Predictive Habitat Modelling as a Tool to Assess the Change in Distribution and Extent of an OSPAR Priority Habitat under an Increased Ocean Temperature Scenario : Consequences for Marine Protected Area Networks and Management 
Abstract 
The aims of this study were to determine the extent and distribution of an OSPAR priority habitat under current baseline ocean temperatures ; to illustrate the prospect for habitat loss under a changing ocean temperature scenario ; and to demonstrate the potential application of predictive habitat mapping in " future-proofing " conservation and biodiversity management . 
Maxent modelling and GIS environmental envelope analysis of the biogenic bed forming species , Modiolus modiolus was carried out . The Maxent model was tested and validated using 75 % / 25 % training / test occurrence records and validated against two sampling biases ( the whole study area and a 20 km buffer ) . The model was compared to the envelope analysis and the area under the receiver operating characteristic curve ( Area Under the curve ; AUC ) was evaluated . 
The performance of the Maxent model was rated as ' good ' to ' excellent ' on all replicated runs and low variation in the runs was recorded from the AUC values . The extent of " most suitable " , " less suitable " and " unsuitable " habitat was calculated for the baseline year ( 2009 ) and the projected increased ocean temperature scenarios ( 2030 , 2050 , 2080 and 2100 ) . A loss of 100 % of " most suitable " habitat was reported by 2080 . 
Maintaining a suitable level of protection of marine habitats / species of conservation importance may require management of the decline and migration rather than maintenance of present extent . Methods applied in this study provide the initial application of a plausible " conservation management tool " . 
Introduction 
It is widely accepted that the natural distribution patterns of organisms are primarily driven by their environmental requirements [ 1 ] ; and that climate change is potentially having an impact on natural distribution patterns through range expansion , contraction and migration [ 2 , 3 ] . The effect which climate change has on geographic distribution is often assessed in terms of potential envelopes / spatial niches shifting in altitude , longitude or latitude ; and this influence could , in turn , threaten biodiversity and the conservation of many species [ 3–5 ] . 
Priority marine habitats ( determined as ' threatened and / or declining species and habitats ' under the OSPAR Convention for the Protection of the Marine Environment of the north-east Atlantic 1992 ) are considered to be of greatest marine nature conservation importance within the North-East Atlantic and are being used to prioritise marine biodiversity conservation and protection under Annex V of the OSPAR Convention 1992 . The maintenance of priority habitats will also contribute to the achievement of ' Good Environmental Status ' ( GES ) under the European Union ( EU ) Marine Strategy Framework Directive ( MSFD ; 2008/56/EC ; see also 6 ) . Appropriate area-based management strategies , including a network of Marine Protected Areas ( MPAs ) , are being considered under the MSFD with these and other habitats in mind [ 7 ] . 
Data on the distribution of marine species and habitats are often limited , mainly because of the complexity and costs of surveying and sampling extensive sea areas . For example , habitat maps based on survey data and ground truthing currently cover just 10 % of the UK continental shelf [ 8 ] . The use of predictive species distribution modelling might therefore provide a suitable tool to fill knowledge gaps , but it may be subject to the issue of over-prediction of range when studying individual species [ 9 ] . Ross and Howell [ 9 ] acknowledged that a more robust approach might be to apply predictive modelling methods to a habitat formed by a species , rather than to the indicator species itself . This principle has been adopted in the present study . 
The objective of this study is to explore the use of a predictive Species Distribution Model ( SDM ) and a Geographical Information System ( GIS ) based Environmental Envelope Analysis ( EEA ) method to create modelled habitat maps for a priority habitat : the biogenic horse mussel reefs formed by the bivalve mollusc Modiolus modiolus ( Linnaeus , 1758 ) . 
Although M. modiolus is a widespread and common species , actual horse mussel beds are limited in their distribution [ 10 ] and often represent biodiversity ' hotspots ' e.g. [ 11 ] , some of which have been , or are in the process of being selected for Marine Protected Area status [ 12–14 ] . M. modiolus is an Arctic-Boreal species , with a distribution range covering the seas around Scandinavia ( including Skagerrak and Kattegat ) and Iceland south towards the Bay of Biscay [ 15–17 ] . M. modiolus is known to inhabit the subtidal and lower intertidal region of the northern Atlantic and Pacific oceans [ 15 ] , often in water depths between 5 and 50 m ; however some individuals have been found at a depth of 280 m [ 15 , 18 ] . Dense aggregations / beds reach their southerly limit around the British Isles , in the Irish Sea . This suggests that their occurrence around the British Isles may be vulnerable to a long-term rise in water temperature [ 16 , 18 ] . 
M. modiolus beds are thought to play an important role in benthic productivity and seabed stabilisation . The beds contribute to high biodiversity and may provide refugia and feeding opportunities to other marine organisms [ 10 , 19 , 20 ] . Although maps of bed distribution have been created , there is still a considerable amount of uncertainty as to the true extent of these beds within the OSPAR region [ 21 ] . 
The primary goal of this study is to use publicly available datasets to test the modelling approaches for a M. modiolus habitat case example , to see whether it may provide a new tool to inform the MSFD spatial management process for key habitats . The models will be applied to determine the extent of habitat suitable for M. modiolus beds under current baseline conditions ; predict habitat loss under an increased ocean temperature scenario ; and demonstrate the application of a predictive habitat mapping tool for " future-proofing " spatial planning for habitats and biodiversity management planning . 
Methods 
Modiolus modiolus Occurrence Data 
The M. modiolus bed occurrence records were extracted from the 2011 OSPAR priority habitats dataset [ 22 ] and corrected based on areas of uncertainty published by Rees [ 21 ] . The data were supplemented with occurrence records collected during more recent UK surveys [ 13 , 14 , 23 ] . A total of 215 occurrence records were obtained ( Figure 1 ) . As a result of the limited geographical coverage of some of the environmental layers , 82 records were excluded because they did not coincide with the environmental layers . 

Figure 1 . Study area , current known distribution of Modiolus modiolus ( Linnaeus , 1758 ) beds and illustrated baseline ( 2009 ) seabed temperature ( °C ) . 
Projection : WGS 1984 UTM 31N . 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0068263.g001 
Environmental Data 
Data on environmental variables of potential biological relevance to M. modiolus were obtained from publically available sources ( Table 1 ) then assigned to a 0.005 ° grid using ArcMap 9.3 Geographical Information System ( GIS ) software . Temperature , depth , substratum , water movement and salinity were chosen based on the M. modiolus environmental requirements as outlined by Holt et al. [ 18 ] , but water quality and suspended sediment were not available for inclusion in this model . 
Table 1 . Environmental variables and data sources 
Increased Ocean Temperature Scenario 
Increased ocean temperature scenarios were established for the following epochs : 2009 ( Figure 1 ) , 2030 , 2050 , 2080 and 2100 based on Locarnini et al. [ 24 ] and the International Panel on Climate Change ( IPCC ) scenario planning methodology [ 25 ] . Predictions were based on the IPCC climate change scenario A1B in which a 4 °C increase in ocean surface temperature would occur by 2100 [ 25 ] . A linear increase in ocean bottom temperature was calculated between 2009 and 2100 , therefore increases of 0.92 °C , 1.80 °C and 3.12 °C were expected for 2030 , 2050 and 2080 respectively . 
Model scenarios assumed a uniform increase in temperature over the entire spatial domain and throughout the water column . 
Environmental Envelope Analysis 
Initial baseline species distribution analysis was carried out through the creation of an environmental envelope for M. modiolus bed populations in ArcMap 9.3 . The M. modiolus bed occurrence records were grouped into populations based on their location and proximity to each other . Populations were selected if the occurrence records were within 10 km of each other , excluding areas of obvious boundaries , e.g. land or sealochs etc. Within this 10 km population grouping , the individual occurrence records were given a 1 km buffer which would represent bed extent within that particular population . Environmental layers were plotted in vector format and overlaid with the population records . The " preferred range " of environmental attributes was characterised in terms of the interquartile ranges of the environmental variable values over the occurrence locations . 
The " preferred range " for the landscape was calculated based on qualitative data ( therefore the interquartile range calculation within ArcMap was not suitable ) . The area of overlap for each population and landscape type was calculated . The percentage of each landscape type inhabited by a population was calculated ( landscape range ) , ranked , then the median and maximum of these percentages ( landscape range ) was determined . The " preferred " landscape types were determined as representing those that were inhabited by the majority of the populations ( ≥ the median of the landscape range ) . 
Areas where " preferred range " attributes occurred for all overlying environmental layers were classed as the environmental envelope for horse mussel beds . 
Species Distribution Model 
Maxent is a predictive method that models the geographic distribution of species using presence-only data . Probability of occurrence is modelled in relation to environmental variables under the assumption that the species distribution will follow the property of maximum entropy [ 26–28 ] . Maxent has been used in a number of comparative studies examining the effectiveness of species distribution modelling ( SDM ) in the marine environment [ 28–30 ] and is considered to be reliable in this context [ 29 ] . 
Model Validation 
The model predictions were tested using the ' Area Under the Curve ' ( AUC ) produced by Maxent . The area under the Receiver Operating Characteristic ( ROC ) curve is a widely used test statistic which measures model performance [ 28 ] . The AUC varies between 0 and 1 , with values above 0.9 indicating excellent prediction , between 0.7 and 0.9 indicating good prediction , below 0.7 indicating poor prediction , and below 0.5 no better than random [ 29 ] . 
Owing to the lack of independent test datasets , models were assessed by 2-fold cross validation on ten replicate runs [ 28 ] . The occurrence dataset was randomly split in ArcMap 9.3 using the Hawths Analysis Tools for ArcGIS extension [ 31 ] each containing a randomly selected 75 % of records for model training and the corresponding 25 % for model testing . A further model cross-validation was run using the full occurrence dataset randomly split into a 90 % training / 10 % test dataset internally using the Maxent random test setting . 
No absence data were available and therefore 10,000 randomly chosen pseudo-absence / background points were run . Selecting the background points from the whole study area may artificially inflate the AUC value , especially if the geographic area is particularly large or the area of suitable habitat is small in relation to the whole study area [ 28 ] . During model evaluation , models were tested using background points selected from within a 20 km buffer of the known occurrence locations ( bias model ) and compared with models run with background points selected from the whole study area ( global model ) . 
It was considered that the landscape layer might artificially influence the distribution of suitable habitat within the model , therefore , jack-knife contributions of each variable were measured to test the contribution of each variable to the model . 
The tested models were visually inspected and compared to the environmental envelope analysis , and occurrence data . This enabled the assessment of model plausibility with respect to the known distribution and areas of suitable habitat outside known occurrence range ( over-prediction ) [ 28 ] . 
Probability of Habitat Distribution 
The probability of occurrence values ( 0 to 1 ) estimated in the Maxent model training and projection runs were separated into 10 bands and the area ( Km 2 ) covered by each band was calculated . 
The 10 probability bands were further separated into 3 categories for MPA region assessment : 
i ) 0.5–1.0 representing a situation where M. modiolus beds may be more likely to occur ( " most suitable habitat " ) ; 
ii ) 0.1–0.49 representing a situation where M. modiolus beds are less likely to occur ( " less suitable habitat " ) ; and 
iii ) 0.0–0.09 representing a situation where M. modiolus beds are highly likely not to occur ( " unsuitable " ) . 
In this study , MPA Regions are defined as designated regions of search for potential MPAs within UK waters ( 200 nm limit ) . 
