Introduction 
The monitoring of species abundance and distribution , supported by knowledge of population dynamics , provides information critical to wildlife conservation and management . It is also becoming a legislative requirement ( e.g. UK Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 , EU Habitats Directive , USA Endangered Species Act 1973 , Marine Mammal Act 1972 , Canadian Environmental Assessment Act 1992 [ 1 ] ) and long-term population monitoring efforts have been established for several species to detect changes in their status [ 2 ] . As long-lived top predators with typically wide geographical dispersal , marine mammals are often proposed as important indicators of the state of relatively inaccessible marine ecosystems [ 3 ] , [ 4 ] . Perhaps unsurprisingly , it is populations in rapid and / or sustained decline that are of greatest interest because these patterns may be a harbinger of large-scale shifts in marine conditions . However , understanding the proximate and ultimate drivers for population decline has proven challenging for wild populations [ 5 ] – [ 7 ] . 
Harbour seals ( Phoca vitulina vitulina ) have been abundant in the north of Scotland , which contained nearly 20 % of all European harbour seals in the late 20th century [ 8 ] . These populations escaped the worst of the epidemics of Phocine Distemper Virus that caused mass mortalities in most other European populations in 1998 and 2002 [ 9 ] . Until recently , harbour seals in Orkney off the north coast of Scotland accounted for nearly half of all British harbour seals . However , aerial surveys detected rapid declines in the Orkney population , as well as in other populations in the northern isles and on the east coast of Scotland , since the late 1990s [ 10 ] . Related research has demonstrated that the proportion of animals hauled out , and available to be counted , in Orkney during the aerial survey period is both high and similar to those reported from other areas [ 11 ] , confirming that the reductions in the counts indicate real declines in abundance rather than changes in seal behaviour . The mean annual rate of decline for Orkney harbour seals has been established at 13 % per annum ( 95 % CI : 10.8–14.8 ) over the period 2001–2010 [ 11 ] . 
There are several potential explanations for the declines . Food shortage , inter-specific competition , disease , predation , pollution , deliberate killing or other anthropogenic factors could all impact on harbour seal population abundance [ 6 ] , [ 12 ] , [ 13 ] . These might affect a combination of emigration , adult mortality , juvenile mortality , and fecundity . Emigration from the Orkney region , or a reduction in immigration to it , seems an unlikely explanation for the decline since harbour seals generally show high site fidelity [ 14 ] , [ 15 ] and none of the neighbouring populations show any signs of having absorbed the large numbers of animals involved [ 16 ] . This leaves adult and / or juvenile mortality , and fecundity as potential proximate causes of the decline . 
Assessing these parameters in wild populations is difficult and often costly [ 17 ] . Due to a lack of information on the age structure of populations , mortality rates often are modeled as being constant across several age-classes , although this assumption is widely accepted to be unrealistic [ 5 ] . Many empirically derived mammalian survivorship curves show three major components : an early , juvenile phase where initial mortality is high but survival increases with age ; an ongoing , or constant , risk of mortality during maturity ; and a later phase of increasing mortality risk due to senescence [ 5 ] , [ 7 ] , [ 17 ] , [ 18 ] . At present , there are insufficient data available to reliably estimate adult survival and fecundity rates for harbour seals in the UK . The present study investigates pup mortality rates in the first months of life using satellite telemetry . 
Harbour seal pups are born in early summer in the UK and weaned after approximately 1 month [ 6 ] , [ 19 ] . The pups are born below the high water mark on intertidal rocks and sand banks and are capable of swimming and diving shortly after birth , although their swimming abilities continue to develop throughout lactation and post-weaning [ 20 ] – [ 22 ] . Because of this precociousness , it is challenging to determine neonatal mortality rates for harbour seals . As with many other species , the younger age-classes tend to be at a higher risk of predation and disease than older animals [ 12 ] . After weaning , harbour seal pup mortality increases over the winter months and is related to the autumn body mass . Pups that are larger in the autumn are more likely to survive through their first year than are smaller pups [ 23 ] . Any form of food limitation , in terms of quality , quantity or accessibility throughout lactation and the post-weaning period may have profound effects on pup survival rates directly by affecting pup condition or indirectly by affecting maternal condition and hence provisioning during the lactation period [ 24 ] , [ 25 ] . Given the potential susceptibility of harbour seal pups to multiple mortality risks , we reasoned that high mortality rates in this age-class could be a major contributor to the decline of harbour seals in Orkney . 
This study utilises information obtained via satellite telemetry to compare harbour seal pup mortality rates between two populations with contrasting population trends : the Orkney population , which is in decline and another population on the west coast of Scotland at Lismore , which has remained stable over the last ten years [ 10 ] . While restricted to the early post-weaning period , the results of this study demonstrate that such data provide useful insights into age-structured population dynamics of harbour seals . 
Methods 
Ethics statement 
In the United Kingdom , all harbour seals are protected under the Conservation of Seals Act ( 1970 ) and the Marine ( Scotland ) Act ( 2010 ) . Accordingly , all seal pup capture and handling procedures were performed under the terms of the UK Home Office licence ( 60/3303 ) granted to the Sea Mammal Research Unit ( University of St Andrews ) and in strict compliance with the Animals ( Scientific Procedures ) Act 1986 . Access to the field sites was permitted by the public access rights in Scotland ( Land Reform ( Scotland ) act of 2003 ) ; accordingly , no specific permissions were required to access these locations . 
Capture and tagging 
Small , location-only ARGOS satellite transmitters ( SPOT tags , Wildlife Computers , Redmond , WA , USA , weight = 50 g ) were deployed on 50 female harbour seal pups : 25 between the 23 rd – 26 th of June 2007 around Lismore ( 56.476°N , 5.516°W ) and 25 between 2 nd – 6 th of July 2007 in Orkney ( 59.2°N , 2.6°W ) . The seals were captured on land and manually restrained while the satellite transmitters were glued to the fur in the mid-dorsal region using quick-setting epoxy . Only very young female pups were tagged . The presence or absence of umbilicus remnants was recorded to provide a general estimate of the time since birth . The length , weight and axial girth of each individual were recorded . Tagging was performed as quickly as possible to minimise disturbance to the animals and disruption of the maternal bond . 
Data analysis 
Once deployed , there are three processes that lead to telemetry systems ceasing to produce useful information : the tag can fail because of mechanical faults such as battery or aerial failure , leading to signal loss ; the tag can detach ; or the animal can die [ 26 ] . In the latter two cases , the tag may continue to transmit , though the pattern of transmissions and movement is unlikely to mimic that of a living seal . The location data was examined by one of the authors ( D. Thompson ) to determine the last date of transmission by each tag while it was attached to a living seal . This subjective decision was based on the pattern of movement of the tags over the last 5 to 10 days during which transmissions were received by the ARGOS . Table 1 contains the date of tag attachment and date of last ' live ' transmission , along with morphometric data , for each individual . 
Table 1 . Phoca vitulina . 
All statistical analyses were performed in R [ 27 ] ; the data ( Appendix S1 ) used and R files ( Appendix S2 ) of the analyses can be found in the Supplementary Information . The distribution of the overall tag duration ( i.e. last ' live ' transmission date – tag attachment date ) was compared between the two populations using Mann-Whitney U tests . The Kolmogorov-Smirnov test first was used to check the assumption that the two samples came from similar distributions . As the distributions looked similar , the p-value was re-estimated by comparison to a null distribution generated by permuting individuals between groups . The sensitivity of the Mann-Whitney U test was investigated by adding a constant to all the dates from Lismore and retesting . The window of values of this constant for which the results of the Mann-Whitney U test were non-significant at the 5 % level was identified . 
Ultimately , we were interested in assessing the probability that an individual pup would survive to a given time , and if the parameters of pup survival differed between a population in rapid decline and a stable one . However , the likelihood of the observed telemetry data had two major components : the probability of tag survival and the probability of animal survival . ' System failure ' – or a loss of useful information from the tags – occurred whenever either of these components failed . The SPOT tags were expected to exhaust their batteries in late February , based on their configuration and an assumed pattern of diving and hauling out . Mechanical faults , such as detachment from the animal , failure of software or electronic components and damage to the antenna , can also end tags ' operation [ 26 ] . When tag failure occurs prior to animal death , the data are considered to be ' right-censored ' [ 7 ] . Importantly , in the present study right-censorship could not be determined because pup death was never observed directly : it could have occurred at any time after the date of the last ' live ' transmission . Additionally , pups were tagged as young as possible and always prior to weaning but the exact number of days since their birth was unknown , giving ' left-truncated ' data . We assumed that survival time and censoring time were independent , random variables . A model describing the probability that the last ' live ' transmission , from a pup born on day b and tagged on day d , occurs on day x ( where x>d>b ) was defined as : 

Giving : 

Each term in this equation can be evaluated for any set of x , b , d and parameters for the distributions of animal and tag lifetimes . The lifetime of tags was assumed to be normally distributed with a high mean . Neither the mean nor the variance of tag survival was known a priori . We used three different distributions to model the lifetime of seals ( Figure 1 ) . 
Figure 1 . Harbour seal pup mortality and hazard rates . ( A ) The probability density function of mortality events ( f(t) ) and ( B ) the hazard rate ( h(t) ) plotted against age for exponential ( dotted lines ) , gamma ( solid lines ) and lognormal ( broken lines ) distributions . Each curve shown uses the parameters that best fit the tagging data and demonstrates the different characteristic shapes of the functions . The exponential distribution gives a constant hazard rate ; the gamma distribution shows an increasing hazard rate over time , and the lognormal hazard rate increases to a peak then declines . 
1 . The simplest model used assumed that pups had a constant risk of mortality , giving rise to an exponential distribution of seal lifetimes ; 
2 . A gamma distribution of life expectancies , which equates to an increasing risk of mortality with age ; 
3 . A lognormal distribution , which provides a risk of mortality that increases to a peak , then declines . 
The gamma and lognormal distributions are especially plausible in the present case ; it is conceivable that harbour seal pup mortality involves trade-offs between the declining benefit of maternal provisioning with age and the increasing energetic demands of thermoregulation - giving rise to an increasing risk of mortality with age , and the increasing robustness of the animals as they grow larger and better able to forage independently – giving rise to a decreasing risk of mortality with age . 
Twelve models were fitted to the data by maximum likelihood , with each possible pairing of the three distributions in each region . When the two regions followed the same distribution , models were fitted both with separate and shared distribution parameters . Two sets of these twelve models were tested . One set assumed that all animals were born on a common , but unknown , date to be estimated from the data ; and a second set assumed a separate birth date estimated from the data for each region . Parameter optimization was performed using the ' optim ' function in R based on the Nelder & Mead [ 28 ] method . The birth date parameter was constrained within the models such that pups could not have been born before June 1st or after June 23nd . Using the range of neonatal weights and rates of mass gain reported in [ 6 ] , [ 19 ] , estimates of pup birth dates were back-calculated from their mass at tagging and tag date . The earliest birth date obtained in this manner was June 4th , so June 1st was chosen as a conservative lower bound for both populations . The upper bound of June 23nd was specified because this was the earliest tagging date . Because of the small sample sizes and relatively high numbers of parameters in the models , we used corrected Akaike information criterion ( AICc ) [ 29 ] for model comparison . The best approximating model was identified as the one with the lowest AICc ( AICcmin ) , and Akaike weights ( wi ) were used as estimates of the probability that each model was correct . These are based on the difference between model i 's AICc score , AICci , and that for the best model ( Eqn 3,4 ) [ 30 ] . 

The best model was refitted to 500 bootstrap re-samples drawn from the data to calculate 95 % confidence intervals of parameter estimates . In addition , to explore the potential range in survival probabilities between the two populations , we fitted each of the models where the two populations had separate distributions ( 18 out of 24 models ) to 500 bootstrap re-samples drawn from the data . These parameter estimates were then used to calculate survival trajectories for each population and the ratio of the probability of survival to 6 months in Orkney to Lismore . 95 % confidence intervals on this ratio , weighted by model AICc weights , were then used to provide a range of the potential difference in survival probability between the populations . 
