Assessing the older adult in the ED 
Frailty 
For older people , the onset of frailty marks the beginning of a different paradigm . Frailty is sometimes defined as the inability to withstand illness without loss of function or a loss of functional homeostasis . 16 , 17 It is a complex interplay of multi-morbidity and aging physiology . Patients with frailty often present to services in a nonspecific fashion or with classic frailty syndromes such as falls , delirium , immobility , incontinence , carer strain , and social breakdown of care . 
Additionally , it is recognized that ED physicians describe feeling less comfortable in dealing with older , more complex patients , 15 , 18 and this may be the reason that discharge diagnoses from the ED are more often inaccurate in the older adult . 5 , 19 
Many older patients have multiple comorbidities that make assessment more complex , therefore requiring more time , which can be challenging in a time-pressured setting . Often history taking can be time consuming and may require corroborating history . Information on social background and medications can be difficult to obtain . Family members and service providers can prove crucial to providing this wider range of information . Associated health professionals can have a significant role to play in identifying deficits and addressing these . Increasingly , they have been demonstrating a successful impact even within the time-limited setting of an ED . 
Background noise levels in the ED , especially at busy times , are difficult for patients with hearing impairment , just as complex environments with multiple unfamiliar visual stimuli can be difficult for patients with visual impairment or cognitive problems . The use of modified rooms or environments may be helpful but is not always possible . Simple measures such as increasing ambient light and reducing noise levels can be employed at minimal cost . 
The initial triage , carried out at the " front door " of the acute hospital setting is a specialist process , which is developed for the rapid prioritization and management of life-threatening conditions . For older people , however , this triage has failed , in the past , to identify the many complexities which precipitate their admission . Assessment of cognitive impairment , functional problems , and existing home care must be seen as essential information for older adults in the ED . 20–23 
The nonspecific nature of the symptoms , with multiple simultaneous challenges or an unclear correlation between illness and presentation , can be bewildering . As we have seen , it takes time to adequately assess a patient across multiple domains , and the lack of multidisciplinary expertise can therefore mean that admission is considered the path of least resistance . 
Patients presenting with problems across multiple domains simultaneously often need multiple professionals to appropriately assess their problems . Ideally , for instance , patients with immobility may require a physiotherapist to assess their mobility , a nurse to assess their continence , a psychiatric nurse to assess their mood , and a physician to assess their heart failure . The use of broad multidisciplinary teams to assess older patients in an organized and coordinated manner , referred to as comprehensive geriatric assessment ( CGA ) , 24 remains the mainstay of acute care for older patients . 
Functional impairment 
Functional problems such as a reduction in the ability to self-care can lead to loss of independence and risk of institutionalization . Importantly , a decline in function can represent a presentation of underlying disease , which would explain its association with a higher mortality rate . 25 , 26 It also represents 

Figure 1 Key domains of the Barthel index . 
an opportunity to intervene and should be addressed if an older adult presents with symptoms of functional decline such as reduced mobility or difficulties with self-care . Assessment of function need not be difficult to assess in a trauma bay if simple semi-structured history taking is used such as one based on the Barthel index 27 ( Figure 1 ) . Patients may require longer time for history taking , and corroborating history from family members can be very enlightening . 
Delirium and cognitive impairment 
Assessment of cognition in the older adult is essential in the ED . Identifying dementia and delirium can be critical to subsequent care and should never be missed . 
In one series , as few as 38 % of patients with severe cognitive impairment or delirium had this detected in the ED . 28 Simple tools such as the four-question abbreviated mental test ( AMT4 ) have relatively good sensitivity ( 90 % ) for detecting impairment requiring further evaluation 29 ( Figure 2 ) . 
Delirium is said to be present in between 11 % and 24 % of older patients at admission to hospital and can develop subsequent to admission in a further 5 % – 35 % . 30 , 31 

Figure 2 The four-question abbreviated mental test . 
Delirium is known to have an association with poor outcome , and as such represents a significant marker of potentially important underlying disease . It is associated with increased hospital length of stay , admission to residential care , and death . 32 , 33 For this reason , its recognition and management is critical , even in the first few hours of assessment . 
Junior medical staff often under-recognize delirium , attributing it to chronic cognitive impairment or failing to adequately assess the patient 's cognition . 34 , 35 
A variety of tools have been developed to aid the recognition of delirium , and the confusion assessment method is the most widely recognized of these and lends itself well to the ED . 36 A more recent test ( the 4AT ) ( Figure S1 ) has been developed however , designed to be used in an urgent-care setting with no special training , including the ability to test drowsy or agitated patients who are ordinarily difficult to assess . 37 Conveniently , it also incorporates the AMT4 test . 29 
Poly-pharmacy 
Poly-pharmacy can be defined as the regular use of multiple drugs , and yet it is recognized that the treatment of even a single condition ( such as hypertension ) may require a number of medications . This makes the avoidance of poly-pharmacy increasingly challenging among older adults . 10 Often the reasons for multiple prescribing are driven by multiple comorbidities requiring long-term medical management . 10 The significance of poly-pharmacy is the direct relationship between the numbers of co-prescribed agents and the frequency of serious drug-related interactions . 10 , 38 
Serious drug side effects leading to presentation at hospital are said to occur in over 10 % of ED visits in adults over 65 . 39 The recognition of poly-pharmacy in an older patient represents an opportunity to intervene or to flag the issue for the patient 's own general practitioner to intervene . Simple tools exist to guide clinicians in an evidence-based approach to the reduction in inappropriate prescribing and to encourage appropriate prescribing in the older adult . 40 Medication reviews also present an opportunity to review patient concordance with drugs and potential opportunities to support this , such as home care supervision of medication . 
Falls 
Falls represent one of the single most common reasons an older adult will present at the ED . 41 Approximately one in three people over the age of 65 will fall per year , with one in two people over the age of 80 falling at least once a year . 42 In the ED , falls in the elderly result in admissions for 15 % – 30 % 11 , 41 and the incidence of fracture in this group is as much as 20 % . 43 Even among patients without significant injury , a fall leading to an ED visit represents a significant marker for functional problems in up to 50 % . 44 
Predictors of subsequent falls include a history of falls in the previous year , falling indoors , and inability to get up following a fall . 45 Falls are a marker of frailty and an indication for detailed assessment and potentially onward referral for multidisciplinary review . Any patient over the age of 65 who falls should have a multifactorial assessment that includes assessment of cognition , continence , medication , mobility problems , postural instability , and visual impairment . This is in addition to screening for potential medical explanations for falls such as causes of syncope . 42 Where possible , much of the assessment should be conducted in the ED ; however , onward referral to falls ' services for specialist multifactorial intervention is essential . 42 
In the ED , the priorities must be the recognition and management of injury associated with a fall , the ruling out of significant underlying pathology , and the diagnosis of the cause of the fall . 
One of the potentially most significant consequences of a fall is a fractured neck of femur , and older adults with frailty can have high mortality rates of up to 25 % at 1 year following this . 46 The priority in the ED following a hip fracture must be rapid identification , and management of potentially treatable comorbidities , such as anemia , hypovolemia , and electrolyte imbalance , to permit emergency surgery as early as possible . 47 
Head trauma associated with a fall should alert the ED physician to the possibility of a subdural hematoma if symptoms of headache , drowsiness , altered mental state , or focal neurological deficits follow the fall . 48 Unfortunately , vigilance may be required as up to 50 % of patients may not recall trauma . 48 
As with other presentations in the elderly , a fall may result as a consequence of underlying illness such as sepsis , cardiac causes , or medication changes . 25 
Multicomponent interventions designed to investigate and manage the causes of falls have been shown to be effective in reducing subsequent falls , admission to hospital , and functional decline in patients who present with a fall , to the ED . 42 , 49 , 50 
Carers 
Carers of older people play an often fundamental role in the care of a patient attending the ED . They may provide the background history for the patient and confirm their current medications . In addition , and crucially in these patients , they can describe the patient 's illness or frailty trajectories if given opportunity . This might mean the description of the patient 's functional decline over years or months , unintended weight loss , cognitive change , or increased frequency and susceptibility to illness . 51 They can also provide , on occasion , valuable insights into the patient 's prior stated wishes where the patient lacks capacity . 
They provide crucial supportive care in the home environment , and their strain may impact on a clinician 's likelihood to admit . 6 Involving carers in a discussion around a patient 's care needs to be done sensitively and with tact , especially where a patient lacks capacity . 52 
For many older patients attending the ED , this level of complex need can be one determining factor for admission . Addressing carer strain is therefore important to a safe patient outcome . Enhancing access to social services , respite opportunities , home carers , day opportunities , community mental health teams , or primary care services may all be means of supporting a fragile carer situation and sustaining independent living for a frailer older adult . 
Nursing home 
One key group of ED attendees is the nursing-home resident . These patients are more likely to attend the ED than their non-residential peers . 53 They tend to be older and are more likely to be female . 53 , 54 They are more likely to present with an infective diagnosis 53–55 or having recently been discharged . 
Interestingly , in a large American series , older patients were significantly more likely to undergo more diagnostic tests or procedures than their counterparts and were much more likely to be admitted ( odds ratio [ OR ] 1.8 , 95 % confidence interval [ CI ] 1.6–2.0 ) . 54 This was replicated in an Australian study , which showed similar findings ( OR 1.13 , 95 % CI 1.06–1.20 ) . 55 
Significantly , patients in residential care are considerably more likely to die in hospital ( OR 1.57–2.3 ) . 53 , 54 This reflects the fact that nursing-home residents have far greater complexity and acuity than their independent counterparts . The UK National Audit Office study estimated that 50 % of hospital deaths from care homes residents were thought to be avoidable with better community care . One Canadian study examining the reasons for ED attendance noted that approximately one-quarter of ED attendances might have been preventable with better anticipatory care for common conditions . 55 
Strategies shown to be effective in reducing admissions include the earlier identification of patients with needs , and the use of advanced care plans to record the patient 's wishes about their future care combined with better planning to reduce hospitalization . 56 , 57 Over 2,500 care-homes have undertaken Gold Standards Framework ( GSF ) training , with on average a halving of hospital admissions and deaths due to this comprehensive whole-system approach , with many hundreds accredited and reaccredited three years later . 58 These written anticipatory / advance care plans identify and record a patient 's preference for their place of future care , their care priorities , or agreed ceilings of care . This might include treatment at home or in a care home in preference to hospital . 
