Endocrine Resistance in Breast Cancer
1. Introduction
Approximately 70% of breast cancers are considered estrogen 
    receptor alpha (ER𝛼) and/or progesterone receptor (PR) positive, 
    and the hormone estrogen (17𝛽-estradiol, E2) represents the 
    primary stimulant in the growth and development of these tumours 
    [1]. Thus deprivation of estrogen signalling through 
    endocrine-targeted therapy has become the mainstay of treatment in 
    ER𝛼-positive disease. Despite the benefits, endocrine therapy 
    resistance eventually occurs in a large number of patients and 
    represents a significant issue for optimal clinical management [2]. 
    In recent years a large body of work has focused on trying to 
    understand the underlying mechanisms leading to resistance and 
    approaches for their circumvention, as well as developing methods 
    to predict which patients are likely to develop resistance and are 
    therefore in need of additional or alternative therapies. While 
    numerous mechanisms have been proposed in addition to those 
    discussed in this review, a major lesson from the laboratory has 
    been the realisation that resistance is both highly complex and 
    heterogeneous and it is clear that more work is needed to identify 
    and improve clinical outcome of patients with ER-positive breast 
    cancers.
2. Estrogen Production
In both pre- and postmenopausal woman estrogen production occurs 
    locally in the normal tissues of subcutaneous fat, the breast, 
    muscle tissue and bone, where it is produced by the enzymatic 
    conversion of androgens (androstenedione and testosterone) by 
    aromatase [1, 3–8] (Figure 1). Within breast cancer tissue, 
    expression of aromatase occurs mainly in fibroblasts [9]. Residual 
    levels of estrogen are also commonly found circulating in the blood 
    and are around 20-fold higher in postmenopausal women compared with 
    premenopausal women, despite the loss of ovarian estrogen 
    production [4, 5, 10]. In postmenopausal women there is a 
    noticeable correlation between risk of breast cancer and levels of 
    circulating estrogen in the blood plasma [11]. Aromatase 
    transcription and protein levels have been shown to differ between 
    the quadrants of the breast in women with breast cancer, being 
    considerably increased in the quadrant containing the tumour [12, 
    13]. Evidence suggests that this is primarily due to tumour 
    cell-released factors such as prostaglandins and inflammatory cell 
    released cytokines such as IL6, IL11 and TNF𝛼, which enhance the 
    activity of aromatase in fibroblasts through intracellular cAMP 
    signalling and regulation of the aromatase gene (CYP19) via an 
    alternative non-standard promoter [1, 14, 15].
3.Estrogen Signalling
In hormone-dependent cancers, estrogen taken up from the blood 
    plasma or from local production diffuses into the cancer cell and 
    binds ER, thus causing the dissociation of

Figure 1: Diagram showing local estrogen production via the 
    enzymatic conversion of androgens to estrogen by aromatase and 
    estrogen receptor signalling in breast cancer. Estrogen (E), 
    estrogen receptor alpha (ER), estrogen response element (ERE) and 
    heat-shock proteins (HSP). The targets of commonly used endocrine 
    therapies in the pathway are shown: aromatase inhibitors (AI), 
    tamoxifen (T) and fulvestrant (F).
heat shock proteins from the ER molecule. The ligand-bound 
    molecule dimerises, associates with other coactivator or 
    corepressor proteins and subsequently binds to conserved estrogen 
    response element (ERE) sequences within the promoter regions of 
    genes over which it exerts transcriptional control [1, 16] (Figure 
    1). ER is a nuclear receptor encoded by the ESR1 gene; it comprises 
    two distinct transactivation domains: activation function (AF)-1 in 
    the amino-terminal region and AF2 in the carboxy-terminal region 
    [17–19]. AF1 is regulated by growth factors acting through the MAPK 
    pathway whereas AF2, located in the ligand binding region of ER is 
    activated by estrogen [17, 20]. Full agonist activity requires both 
    AF1 and AF2 to be active [21]. Studies have shown that ERE bound ER 
    is ubiquitinated and targeted for proteosomal degradation, 
    suggesting that each ER molecule is destined for only one cycle of 
    estrogen signalling [22]. EREs were first discovered flanking the 
    regions of estrogen-regulated vitellogennin genes in 
    Xenopus laevis and have since been found in the 
    promoter regions of several hundred human genes, with a minimum 
    consensus sequence consisting of a 13 base-pair palindromic 
    inverted repeat: 5'-GGTCANNNTGACC-3' (N: any nucleotide) 
    [23–25]. Some EREs have been identified which have imperfect 
    palindromic sequences, differing from the consensus sequence by one 
    or more nucleotides and are often less responsive to ligand-bound 
    ER than consensus sequence EREs [26].The association of 
    ligand-bound ER with EREs is thought to be achieved via either of 
    two mechanisms: (i) “direct binding” in which the molecule binds to 
    the EREs and associates directly with coactivator/corepressor 
    molecules and the RNA polymerase II transcription initiation 
    complex, or (ii) “tethering” whereby the ligand-bound ER does not 
    bind DNA but rather interacts with another DNA bound transcription 
    factor either stabilising that factor, or recruiting additional 
    cofactors to the complex [27, 28]. The latter is thought to be the 
    mechanism by which ligand-bound ER associates with transcription 
    factor SP1 [27]. Via these transcriptional associations estrogen 
    can induce proliferation of cancer cells which overexpress ER. It 
    should be noted that non-ligand-bound ER complexes can also bind to 
    EREs, without the ability to regulate gene expression it was 
    thought [17, 29–31] however, recent chromatin immunoprecipitation 
    sequencing data (ChIP-seq) from MCF7 breast cancer cell lines 
    suggests that endogenous ER𝛼 can bind DNA in the absence of the 
    ligand and that transcripts are produced at those sites [32].
Although the exact mechanisms by which estrogen drives 
    proliferation are yet to be fully elucidated, a number of potential 
    models have been proposed [33]. In normal human breast tissue, 
    cells which do not express ER proliferate via paracrine signalling, 
    whereas in tumours an autocrine action occurs in which ER-positive 
    cells proliferate [34]. It has been reported that estrogen promotes 
    transition through the G1/S phase of cell cycle via a number of 
    pathways involving the induction of cyclin-D1 expression by 
    ligand-bound ER, mediated by one or more transcription factors 
    including: c- Jun, c-Fos, and ATF-2 at the AP1 promoter site, or 
    via an SP1 transcription factor dependent pathway [35–41]. 
    Furthermore, ligand-bound ER has also been shown to bind cyclin-D1 
    and, as a complex, regulate the expression of that gene and other 
    downstream genes [39, 42]. Cyclin-D1 subsequently binds and 
    activates CDK4 and CDK6, which regulate G1/S phase transition 
    through the phosphorylation of RB1. The latter can no longer 
    inhibit E2F/DP1 complexes, thus allowing them to activate the 
    transcription of S-phase entry genes such as those encoding 
    cyclin-E1 and cyclin-A1 [35, 36, 43, 44]. Other studies suggest 
    that ligand-bound ER may promote G1/S phase transition by induction 
    of c-MYC which leads to activation of CDC25A and CDK4 gene 
    transcription [45– 47]. Active CDC25A dephosphorylates CDK2 leading 
    to the inhibition of RB1 and p130 and transcriptional activation of 
    E2F/DP1 complexes which in turn upregulates S-phase entry genes 
    [36, 48, 49]. Alternatively, it has been proposed that ER could 
    activate G1/S phase transition via redistribution and 
    downregulation of p21 and P27KIP1 thus removing their inhibitory 
    control over key cell cycle progression proteins such as CDK2 [49, 
    50]. It is thought this might be achieved by ubiquitin targeting 
    for proteosomal degradation or by nuclear export via membrane-bound 
    ER associated with ERK2 and CRM1 [51, 52].
4. Endocrine Therapy
In 1896 George Beatson, a Glasgow surgeon, showed that patients 
    with advanced breast cancer had regression of metastatic disease 
    following oophorectomy, providing the first contemporaneous 
    published evidence of a link between hormones and breast cancer. By 
    1937 Dodds and Robertson had synthesised diethylstilboestrol and 
    its anti-tumour activity was demonstrated although its use was 
    limited by severe side effects (Figure 2) [53]. In 1973, the 
    synthetic estrogen blocker tamoxifen was licensed for use in the 
    treatment of hormone-positive breast cancer and became the mainstay 
    of endocrine therapy for the next 30 years [54]. Today, endocrine 
    therapy constitutes a major treatment modality in ER-positive 
    breast cancer and can be used alone or in addition to chemotherapy, 
    which has more associated toxicity [55– 58]. Indeed, studies have 
    shown it to provide more benefit in the adjuvant setting in 
    postmenopausal women with ER-positive breast cancer than 
    doxorubicin or taxane-containing chemotherapy [59, 60]. Endocrine 
    therapies work by manipulating endocrine signalling by the 
    exogenous administration of hormone antagonists designed to inhibit 
    the biosynthesis and/or activity of estrogen. Endocrine therapies 
    are considered to be cytostatic rather than cytotoxic, leading to 
    reduced proliferation and reduction of growth rate [61]. At the 
    simplest molecular level, they achieve this through the arrest of 
    cell cycle in G1/S phase [62]. Today, several types of endocrine 
    therapies exist and are used commonly in the treatment of 
    ER-positive breast cancer in postmenopausal women.
First synthesised in the 1960s, tamoxifen is a selective 
    estrogen receptor modulator (SERM) (Figures 1 and 2).

Figure 2: Timeline of approval for endocrine therapy agents.
It functions by disrupting the estrogen signalling pathway by 
    competitive intranuclear binding to ER, causing a conformational 
    change to the subsequently formed ER dimer involving the shift of 
    helix 12 into an adjacent coactivator site (AF2), thus blocking the 
    binding of the coactivator, which significantly reduces the level 
    of estrogen-regulated gene transcription [21, 63, 64]. However, 
    this complex has been shown to exhibit partial estrogen-agonist 
    properties due to the remaining activity of AF1 [1, 21]. A newer 
    yet similar class of endocrine therapies also exist which are known 
    as selective estrogen receptor downregulators (SERDs) and these 
    include fulvestrant, which was first approved for use in 2002. 
    Fulvestrant functions to downregulate ER by competitive binding to 
    ER dimers and by causing immobilisation of ER in the nuclear matrix 
    which is accompanied by degradation via the ubiquitin-proteasome 
    pathway [65] (Figures 1 and 2). It has been shown to be more potent 
    than tamoxifen in vitro and does not exhibit the 
    partial estrogen-agonist properties associated with tamoxifen in 
    murine models. This is due to the fact that both AF1 and AF2 
    activities are suppressed, blocking cofactor recruitment at the ERE 
    site of estrogen responsive genes [21, 66, 67].
Another major group of endocrine therapies in routine clinical 
    use are third-generation aromatase inhibitors (AIs), which comprise 
    two drug types. Firstly, the irreversible steroidal inhibitors 
    (type 1), including exemestane which are androstenedione analogues 
    and secondly, the non-steroidal inhibitors (type 2), which include 
    letrozole and anastrozole [1, 68–73] (Figures 1 and 2). AIs seek to 
    disrupt estrogen signalling by either: irreversible and 
    inactivating binding (type 1), or reversible and competitive 
    binding (type 2) to the aromatase enzyme; thus significantly 
    reducing local estrogen biosynthesis and hence intratumoural levels 
    of estrogen [1, 74–76]. Indeed, in the adjuvant setting, letrozole, 
    anastrozole and exemestane have been shown to be more effective 
    than tamoxifen with a significant reduction in the rate of relapse 
    [73, 77–79]. Endocrine therapies can also be used in the treatment 
    of ER-positive breast cancer in premenopausal women where their use 
    is usually combined with drugs such as goserelin (zoladex) to 
    suppress ovarian estrogen production [80].
In postmenopausal women, adjuvant treatment represents the major 
    clinical setting for endocrine therapy, where long-term adjuvant 
    systemic treatment is targeted against micro-metastatic disease 
    [2]. Indeed, several studies have reported overwhelming evidence of 
    a high correlation between the adjuvant use of endocrine therapy 
    and reduction in the risk of recurrence [81]. Endocrine therapy can 
    also have an important role in the neoadjuvant setting where 
    systemic treatment may be indicated for 3 to 4 months prior to 
    surgery in postmenopausal women with large and/or technically 
    inoperable tumours. This treatment is intended to shrink the tumour 
    so that, in locally advanced disease surgery becomes possible and 
    in large operable breast cancers, breast conserving surgery (BCS) 
    can be performed [2, 56]. The Immediate Preoperative Anastrozole or 
    Combined with Tamoxifen (IMPACT) study was a phase 3 clinical trial 
    which showed that 46% of 124 ER-positive postmenopausal women 
    initially recommended for mastectomy became eligible for BCS 
    following 3 months of neoadjuvant anastrozole [82]. Similar results 
    were found in a study of exemestane in which 85% of 40 patients 
    deemed unfit for BCS at diagnosis became eligible following 6 
    months of neoadjuvant therapy [83]. Indeed by measuring 
    proliferation levels of malignant cells using the expression of 
    nuclear antigen Ki67, studies have shown a reduction in 
    proliferation in approximately 90% of ER-positive primary breast 
    tumours treated with and responsive to AIs, confirming that these 
    tumours derive significant proliferative stimulus from estrogen and 
    that this can be potently supressed by endocrine therapy [84, 85]. 
    Endocrine therapy can also be used in the treatment of advanced or 
    metastatic disease to prolong survival, either as a monotherapy or 
    as part of a sequenced treatment regimen with chemotherapy, 
    palliative surgery or radiotherapy [86].
