1. Introduction
Monepantel (trade name Zolvix®) was launched, firstly in New 
    Zealand in 2009, and then in Australia and the UK in 2010 by 
    Novartis Animal Health. It was the first new drug family of 
    anthelmintic to appear on the livestock healthcare market for over 
    25 years (Kaminsky et al., 2008). In an effort to prolong the 
    useful life of this new compound and protect the efficacy of the 
    older anthelmintic families, monepantel has been sold as 
    prescription only medicine (POM-V) in the UK. Although efforts have 
    been made to “protect” the compound, the first cases of resistance 
    have been reported only two years after its launch. The first case 
    of resistance was reported in sheep and goats in New Zealand 
    (Leathwick et al., 2013; Scott et al., 2013) and another case was 
    reported on a goat farm in New South Wales, Australia 
    (https://wormmailinthecloud.wordpress.com/?s=monepantel+resistance; 
    last accessed 30APR15). All reports have found that 
    Teladorsagia circumcincta was one of the 
    parasites surviving treatment.
An understanding of the development of anthelmintic resistance 
    and evolvement of parasites in the face of anthelmintic pressure is 
    key to developing strategies to preserve their efficacy. Previously 
    different selection processes for the assessment of anthelmintic 
    resistance have been used: (a) comparison of anthelmintic resistant 
    and sensitive field derived isolates (Le Jambre et al., 1977; Hall 
    et al., 1978; Kelly et al., 1978; Hunt et al., 2008, 2010); (b) 
    experimental selection via increasing sub-therapeutic dosages 
    in vivo (Kates et al., 1973; Colglazier et al., 
    1974a; Egerton et al., 1988; Giordano et al., 1988; Shoop et al., 
    1990; Rohrer et al., 1994; Ranjan et al., 2002; Coles et al., 
    2005); (c) in vitro pressurisation and selection 
    of individuals within a population with an inherent insensitivity 
    to a compound and use them for in vivo trials 
    (Maingi et al., 1990; Kaminsky et al., 2008); (d) comparison of 
    populations pre- and post in vitro anthelmintic 
    exposure (Laing, 2010; De Graef et al., 2013); (e) introgression of 
    resistant genes into sensitive populations through the process of 
    backcrossing individuals (Redman et al., 2012); (f) comparison of 
    clade V free living model nematode systems to extrapolate 
    information on parasitic nematodes (Driscoll et al., 1989; 
    Chehresa, 1996).
Phenotypic variation in life history traits following selection 
    for benzimidazole (BZ; Hall et al., 1978, 1981; Kelly et al., 1978; 
    Maingi et al., 1990; Leignel and Cabaret, 2001) and ivermectin (IV; 
    Echevarria et al., 1993a, 1993b) resistance has been examined 
    previously in a number of parasite species. Historically, it was 
    believed that chemotherapy that impacts on adult parasite life 
    expectancy would result in one of the two outcomes: either earlier 
    development to sexual maturity of parasites in order to propagate 
    prior to treatment, or delayed development to avoid the effects of 
    treatment (Arneberg et al., 1998; Skorping and Read, 1998). The 
    finding from the aforementioned selection studies would suggest 
    that the impact of the development of resistance on phenotypes, as 
    one might expect, is not so clear cut, and it is influenced by a 
    number of host related/physiological (e.g. age, size, diet, immune 
    status, presence of conspecifics and heterospecifics) and 
    environmental factors (Poulin, 1996).
The aims of this study were: firstly, to generate T. 
    circumcincta isolates selected for monepantel resistance 
    from previously phenotypically characterised parental isolates to 
    improve our understanding of the development, dissemination and 
    detection of MPTL resistance and secondly, to assess the extent of 
    phenotypic changes that occur in selected isolates compared to 
    parental isolates following selection for resistance to MPTL.
2. Materials and method
2.1 Parasite isolates
Three T. circumcincta (designated MTci2, 
    MTci5 and MTci7) isolates were used to generate the MPTL resistant 
    isolates, as outlined in section 2.2 (Table 1). MTci2 is 
    phenotypically sensitive to all broad spectrum anthelmintics 
    (unpublished data) whilst MTci5 and MTci7 are phenotypically BZ, 
    levamisole (LV) and IV resistant (Sargison et al., 2001; Bartley et 
    al., 2004, 2005). MTci7 also exhibits moxidectin (MX) resistance 
    (Sargison et al., 2005; Wilson and Sargison, 2007). The isolates 
    were passaged through parasite naive lambs that were housed under 
    conditions that precluded contamination with other nematode species 
    prior to use. During the period of selection, the parental isolates 
    were independently passaged four times.
2.2 Monepantel resistance selection process
Three MPTL resistant T. circumcincta isolates 
    were artificially selected in vivo from 
    phenotypically characterised isolates using an adaptation of a 
    previously outlined methodology (Coles et al., 2005). In brief, 
    lambs were initially mono-specifically infected with approximately 
    20,000 infective larvae of MTci2, MTci5 or MTci7. Due to 
    availability of stocks, the infective larvae used to initiate the 
    infections were 1, 4 and 11 months old for MTci7, MTci2 and MTci5, 
    respectively. All subsequent infections were less than 1 month old 
    when administered. All larvae were assessed visually to ensure they 
    appeared active. Prior to infection all larvae were stored in 100 
    ml tapwater in 75 cm2 suspension culture 
    flasks (Startsedt Ltd, Germany) between 4 and 8 °C. At patency, 
    lambs were administered monepantel (Zolvix®, Novartis Animal 
    Heath) at 0.125 mg/kg bodyweight 
    (BW), 1/20th of the manufacturer’s recommended dose rate. The 
    lowest dose used was selected because previous work had 
    demonstrated that even a dose of 1.25 mg/kg BW had been effective 
    at removing >99% of T. circumcincta 
    populations (Kaminsky et al., 2009). Eggs from surviving worms were 
    collected and cultured to generate infective larvae. Lambs with 
    positive faecal egg counts (FEC) were re-treated at increasing dose 
    rates of MPTL (e.g. 0.25, 0.5, 0.63, 0.83, 1.25, 1.88 and 2.5 mg/kg 
    BW) until egg counts dropped. At this point, the larvae obtained 
    from the highest dosage were either used to re-infect the donor 
    that had been previously treated or used to infect a new donor. At 
    patency, the process was repeated using increasing dose rates until 
    a fully resistant isolate, i.e. able to survive a full therapeutic 
    dose rate (2.5 mg/kg BW), was generated. Further information can be 
    found in the supplementary material file attached.
2.3 Monepantel efficacy trial design
The monepantel efficacy trial overall included 10 groups 
    including parent (without anthelmintic treatment) and selected 
    (with and without monepantel administration on day 28, i.e. -CON 
    and -MPTL) isolates. Five lambs were randomly allocated to each of 
    the 10 groups: MTci2, MTci5, MTci7, MTci7-MPTL, MTci2-11-CON, 
    MTci5-13-CON, MTci7-12-CON, MTci2-11-MTPL, MTci5-13-MTPL, 
    MTci7-12-MTPL (Table 1). The group MTci7-MPTL is a treatment 
    validation group, included for those infected with the parental 
    isolate MTci7, to confirm that MPTL was effective at removing adult 
    populations in the original parental isolate. On day 0, Suffolk 
    greyface wormfree crossbred lambs of 5 to 9 months were challenged 
    per os with 7000 infective larvae from one of 
    the three parental isolates (MTci2, MTci5 or MTci7) or three 
    monepantel selected isolates (MTci2-11, MTci5-13 or MTci7-12) 
    according to the constituent of group. Faecal egg counts were 
    conducted on the lambs prior to the start of the trial to confirm 
    their worm-free status, and on the day of treatment (day 28) to 
    allow the formation of groups within which all lambs have similar 
    egg counts. Further FECs were conducted throughout the trial to 
    assess time to patency and magnitude of egg output (details in 
    section 2.3.1). On day 28 post-infection, the lambs were weighed 
    and dosed orally by syringe at the manufacturer’s recommended dose 
    rate with either Zolvix® (2.5 mg/kg BW; -MPTL) or left untreated to 
    act as controls (-CON). All anthelmintic administrations were 
    rounded up to the nearest 0.2 ml (dosage range 2.5–2.7 mg/kg BW). 
    All of the animals were necropsied seven days post-treatment; the 
    methods used to euthanase the animals, remove and process their 
    organs for worm burden recovery were as described by Patterson et 
    al. (1996). The total worm burdens were estimated from 2% 
    sub-samples of the abomasal washings and saline digests. Recovered 
    worms were sexed and staged (MAFF, 1986). Due to animal, material 
    and time constraints the above trials were conducted at two 
    separate time points. The controlled efficacy test (CET) using 
    MTci7 and its selected isolate (MTci7-12) was investigated in one 
    trial whilst MTci2, MTci5, MTci2-11 and MTci5-13 were investigated 
    in a second trial. All experimental procedures described here were 
    approved by the Moredun Research Institute Experiments and Ethics 
    Committee and were conducted under the legislation of a UK Home 
    Office License (reference PPL 60/03899) in accordance with the 
    Animals (Scientific Procedures) Act of 1986.
Table 1 
    Teladorsagia circumcincta isolate designations 
    pre- (parent) and post-selection for monepantel resistance.
2.3.1 Faecal egg count
Faecal samples were taken per rectum from 
    each lamb prior to infection to confirm that they were negative for 
    nematode eggs: from day 8 post infection (PI) egg counts, eggs per 
    gram (EPG), were performed three times a week to assess pre-patency 
    of the isolates, on day 27 PI prior to the anthelmintic treatment 
    (day 28), and then daily until necropsy seven days later. Faecal 
    egg counts were conducted throughout the trials using a 
    modification of a salt flotation method with a sensitivity of up to 
    one egg per gram (Christie and Jackson, 1982), allowing the 
    evaluation of the effectiveness of the anthelmintic on faecal egg 
    count reduction.
2.3.2 Eggs in utero and worm body lengths
Twenty individual adult worms (20 male and 20 female worms where 
    available) were randomly selected from each lamb within a group, 
    mounted in a drop of lactophenol (GCC Diagnostics) on a microscope 
    slide and assessed for fecundity. The numbers of eggs in 
    utero in female worms were enumerated at magnification 
    (×40) on a compound microscope. Images were captured (Nikon D70) of 
    each individual for length determination; where multiple images 
    were captured, the images were compiled to form a single composite 
    image using an image editing program (Adobe Photoshop Elements 
    4.0).Worm lengths were estimated using image processing software 
    (ImageJ 1.46r).
2.4 Statistical analysis
The main effects to be investigated were: comparisons between 
    groups corresponding to the parental isolates (MTci2, MTci5, 
    MTci7), comparisons between groups corresponding to the parent and 
    selected isolates (versus MTci2-11-CON, MTci5-13-CON, 
    MTci7-12-CON), and finally, comparisons between groups 
    corresponding to the selected isolates without treatment (-CON) and 
    with treatment (-MPTL) (versus MTci2-11-MTPL, MTci5-13-MTPL, 
    MTci7-12-MTPL).
2.4.1 Parasite establishment and worm burden
The data on each stage of worm burden (juvenile, male, female 
    and total) in individual lamb were investigated by fitting a 
    generalised linear mixed model (GLMM) to the counts using a 
    logarithmic link function and assuming the Poisson distribution. 
    Estimates of establishment rate (the proportion of juvenile and 
    adult worms recovered from the initial challenge dose i.e. 7000) 
    and development rate (the proportion of adult worms out of total 
    worms established) were obtained for each group by fitting a GLMMs 
    using a logit link function and assuming the binomial distribution. 
    All models included group as a fixed effect, and lamb (the level of 
    each observation) as a random effect to allow for 
    over-dispersion.
2.4.2 Treatment efficacy
The percentage efficacy of the treatment for each selected 
    isolate was calculated using the equation: (1-(T/C)) × 100, where C 
    and T are the arithmetic mean total worm burdens or faecal egg 
    counts at 35 days PI of the control (-CON) and treated (-MPTL) 
    groups, respectively (Coles et al., 1992). According to Coles et 
    al. (1992), anthelmintic resistance was deemed to be present when 
    the mean percentage efficacy at reducing faecal egg output or worm 
    burden was less than 95%.
2.4.3 Adult worm body length
The data on length of male and female worms were each analysed 
    using a linear mixed model (LMM). The model included group as a 
    fixed effect and lamb as a random effect.
2.4.4 Per capita fecundity
The worm egg counts in utero were analysed 
    using a GLMM with a logarithmic link function and assuming the 
    Poisson distribution. The model incorporated the group as a fixed 
    effect and lamb as a random effect, and worm as a random effect to 
    allow for overdispersion. Two separate GLMMs were investigated, 
    with and without an offset variable of the logarithm of the female 
    worm length. An additional GLMM was also fitted to estimate the 
    effect of logarithm of the female worm length on the egg counts.
2.4.5 Time to patency
The data on time to patency for each animal were calculated as 
    the time when the faecal egg count is greater than or equal to 25 
    eggs per gram. This was analysed using a linear model (LM). The 
    model included the isolate, combining the two groups for each 
    selected isolate (-CON and -MPTL), as a fixed effect, because days 
    to patency are before the treatment day (i.e. day 28).
