1 . Introduction 
It is now widely accepted that global climate change is taking place as a result of human activity . Although the influence of a changing climate may be less severe in Scotland than that predicted for some regions of the world , there will be environmental and economic consequences including the potential impact on the commercially important forests of Sitka spruce ( Picea sitchensis ( Bong . ) Carr . ) . This species dominates the forestry sector in Scotland accounting for over half of the total forest area of conifers of nearly one million hectares . It has long been favoured by the forestry industry due to its adaptability to a wide range of site types , relative ease of establishment , good growth rate , tolerance of exposure , and timber suited to a wide range of end uses such as construction , board manufacture and pulp . Not surprisingly , foresters and forest owners are increasingly concerned about the putative effects of climate change on Sitka spruce , and that decisions over the direction of future management can not be delayed since the long timescales trees require to mature are well within the time periods of predicted change . 
Sitka spruce has traditionally been managed in Scotland predominately as pure stands using clear-cutting and replanting that is simple to apply and effective at producing sawlogs in relatively short rotations of around 35-50 years . Foresters have long been aware that depending so heavily on one species managed as pure , even-aged stands has risks even before considering the potential consequences of climate change . Climate is a complex process and it can only be speculated at what changes in annual mean as well as seasonal variation in temperature , solar radiation ( influenced by cloud cover ) , moisture and atmospheric CO 2 will have on the wider environment and how trees and forests will respond . Current evidence based on UK Climate Projections ( UKCP09 ) suggests that by the end of the 21st century , the climate in Scotland will become warmer throughout the year with drier summers , particularly in eastern districts , and wetter winters [ 1 ] . It has also been suggested that more frequent strong to storm force winds may occur particularly during the winter months [ 2 ] , increasing the risk of forest damage and timber loss [ 3 ] . 
A warmer climate may improve growth of Sitka spruce where moisture and nutrients are not limiting [ 4 ] and similar responses have been observed in other tree species and forest types [ 5 ] . However , there are likely to be negative impacts on growth particularly in areas that become more prone to drought [ 6 ] . A warmer climate may also lead to a greater susceptibility to biotic attack and there is already evidence that climate change is influencing the occurrence of pests and diseases leading to tree mortality [ 7 ] . Higher atmospheric CO 2 concentration has generally been shown to have a positive impact on tree growth , but it remains uncertain whether rising CO 2 levels in the atmosphere will continue to cause increases in forest growth and carbon storage [ 5 ] . Generally , climate models predict an increased risk of more extreme climatic events . 
While climate change models may provide information on generalised future changes to the environment , they do not have the level of accuracy and precision required by foresters and other natural resource managers to make informed decisions [ 8 ] . Indeed , there is absolutely no guarantee that any of these predictions will be realised and , given the scale of uncertainty , foresters will have to consider adaptive management strategies that maintain the ability to change silvicultural direction in forest stands that take account of the possibility that future climate change scenarios may not occur as predicted , or even happen at all . Nevertheless , managing for an uncertain future requires the " worse-case scenarios " suggested by climate change models to be taken into account , but at the same time not discounting the possibility that alternative patterns of change may occur . This review considers the potential impact of climate change on Sitka spruce forests in Scotland on future distribution of the species and potential risks of attack by pests and diseases . It examines silvicultural options that promote resilience in Sitka spruce stands and forests to potential climate change effects while maintaining management flexibility . 
2 . Geographic Distribution 
Perhaps the key issue facing foresters is whether the tree species that support a large proportion of the timber processing sector are sufficiently adaptable to changing climatic conditions for their continued use . Given the long timescale required for new field trials to provide the necessary information , decisions on species and provenance suitability largely rely on observations made on stands currently growing under range of climatic conditions and matching these to a future climatic environment predicted for some other site [ 9 ] . This information can be used along with climate change models to identify potentially suitable environmental conditions for particular species in the future [ 10 ] . For non-native species such as Sitka spruce , information can also be gained by studying growth performance in their natural habitat . 
Sitka spruce is native to the Pacific forests of North-West America forming a narrow coastal strip stretching from Alaska to California . The provenance of Sitka spruce grown in Scotland is almost entirely from Queen Charlotte Islands , Canada and is favoured due to its adaptability to the cool maritime conditions found here . Southern provenances , such as Washington and Oregon , have been found to be susceptible to autumn frost damage in comparison to Queen Charlotte Islands [ 11 ] , and although the incidence of frost is predicted to decline in the future , sufficient risks remain to continue with Queen Charlotte Islands as the preferred option [ 2 ] . Sitka spruce , in common with most spruce species , requires a relatively high soil moisture status for good growth with an annual precipitation typically around 1000 mm or greater [ 12 ] . Sitka spruce can grow reasonably well with an annual rainfall of as low a 700-800 mm [ 13 ] , but this would require consistent moisture availability particularly during the growing season and this can not be guaranteed under predicted changes in the patterns of rainfall . The low annual rainfall currently experienced in parts of eastern Scotland already limits the planting of Sitka spruce and stem crack and tree death have been reported as a result of recent very dry summers [ 14 ] . Where Sitka spruce is already showing signs of drought stress , then more drought tolerant species such as pines ( Pinus spp. ) should be used to replace spruce , although even pines may suffer if the drought conditions become increasingly severe [ 6 ] . Sitka spruce may also come under stress on shallow , poorly drained soils that may experience waterlogging in the winter then suffer an extended period of drought in the summer [ 2 ] . 
West and north Scotland is predicted to be wetter in the future and therefore least sensitive to drought and it has been suggested that forest expansion using Sitka spruce should be targeted in these areas [ 6 ] . While climate models suggest a general warming of the atmosphere , there is an alternative scenario in which increased precipitation and rainfall frequency – predicted with continued climatic warming – may in fact cause in a reduction in the temperature range in northern maritime regions due to increased cloud cover that may lead to increasing water-table levels and ultimately to an expansion of bog [ 15 ] , which in turn would limit where Sitka spruce can be potentially grown . Given the wide range of future climatic scenarios , it is only possible to speculate on the geographic shift where Sitka spruce may grow well . Figure 1 illustrates one scenario ( based on UKCIP02 high emissions highlighting a more extreme case ) for the predicted shift in geographic suitability of Sitka spruce in 2080 ( based on Ray [ 2 ] ) . 

Figure 1 . Sketch map of zones showing current and predicted suitability zones for Sitka spruce in Scotland by 2080. ( 1 ) remains largely suitable ; ( 2 ) partially suitable becoming more suitable ; ( 3 ) partially suitable becoming largely unsuitable ; ( 4 ) remains largely unsuitable . Based on a simplified version of data presented in Ray [ 2 ] . 
Much of the Sitka spruce planted in Scotland in recent decades is selected stock derived from a long-term breeding programme with the aim of improving growth rate , stem form and wood density in comparison with the base population of Queen Charlotte Islands origin . Seed orchards were established using 40 superior genotypes , drawn from an initial selection of 1800 " plus " trees [ 16 ] , from which seed was derived for the production of forest plants . Since the 1990s , the process has been further refined with seed being produced from controlled crosses between selected parents from around 20 mother trees and a mixture of pollen from a similar number of unrelated father trees . In spite of concerns that the breeding programme may reduce genetic diversity and become less adaptable to potential climate change , trees produced from these crosses are likely to have similar levels of genetic diversity to trees produced from seed orchard seed and likely to be as diverse as unimproved collections from the North-West America [ 17 ] . The breeding programme has been further refined to use " full sibling families " with a single known male and female tested parent [ 16 ] . While there may be advantages in the superior performance of these trees , foresters need to be aware of the risks in reducing the genetic diversity that may result in spruce stands becoming less able to adapt to future climate change [ 17 ] . Overall , the evidence suggests caution at significant changes to provenance choice of Sitka spruce and that the use of genetically improved planting stock should continue as long as the breeding programme takes account of the need to maintain genetic diversity within the population . 
3 . Susceptibility to Pests and Diseases 
One of the greatest threats to the global forestry industry is the increase in attacks from pests and diseases thought to be associated with a changing climate , although international trading undoubtedly contributes to the risk of attack by alien invasive species . There is a high probability of pests and diseases becoming more predominant in Scotland where winters are milder and summers more prone to droughts increasing levels of stress [ 18 ] . Already two major forest tree diseases of the genus Dothistroma and Phytophthora have affected large areas of forest in Scotland . Dothistroma septosporum ( Dorog. ) has had a major impact on lodgepole pine ( Pinus contorta Dougl. ) causing widespread death of this species . While the global spread of Dothistroma septosporum is thought to be linked to a change in climate that promotes its spread [ 19 ] , the intensity of infection is thought be linked to the formation of large plantations of highly susceptible species [ 7 ] . 
Species of Phytophthora are causing major damage to tree species in many parts of the world . Over the last half century , observed increases in mean winter temperatures and a tendency for drier summers and wetter winters with heavier rainfall has favoured infection by several Phytophthora species in Central Europe [ 7 ] . Phytophtora ramorum ( Werres , De Cock & Man in't Veld ) has already had a devastating effect on larches ( Larix species ) wiping out large areas in south and west Scotland . A warmer climate is thought to favour the spread of pests and diseases northwards and in elevation that would have normally succumbed to winter cold . In addition , a changing climate may stress trees that then become more susceptible to native and introduced pests and diseases [ 7 ] . To date , Sitka spruce has shown remarkable resilience to biotic damage . The great spruce bark beetle ( Dendroctonus micans Kug. ) caused concern when first reported in Britain in 1982 , but in spite of initial fears , damage has remained localised and has not become a major threat . However , warmer temperatures could promote its spread throughout the entire spruce range and that spruce stands subject to increasing drought stress , as is predicted for parts of eastern Scotland , may succumb to Dendroctonus [ 18 ] . 
The green spruce aphid ( Elatobium abietinum Walker ) can cause significant defoliation of trees from time to time , but attacked trees appear to recover [ 20 ] . Severe outbreaks of the green aphid have been linked to mild winters and can result in volume loss [ 21 ] . Nevertheless , it can not be ruled out that future milder winters may benefit the green spruce aphid and that attacks on Sitka spruce may have a greater impact on growth , particularly in eastern part of Scotland where drought stress is predicted to become more frequent [ 18,22 ] . There have been periodic outbreaks of the winter moth ( Operophtera brumata L. ) on Sitka spruce in Scotland . These depend on the synchrony of the eggs hatching with the time of new spruce shoots flushing in spring on which the larva feed . Under climate warming , the emergence of the moth was predicted to occur earlier , but it appears that the date of budburst of Sitka spruce does not greatly change resulting in decreased synchrony between the two events [ 23 ] . The authors suggest that synchrony between different types of temperature-driven phenologies may become poorer with climatic warming , although the moth may evolve to adapt to the asynchrony . 
