1. Introduction
The management of ecosystems for carbon (C) sequestration, 
    defined as the transfer of CO2 from the 
    atmosphere into long-lived C pools for storage [1], has become a 
    national and an international objective [2–4]. C stocks within 
    different ecosystems in the UK are fairly well quantified [5], but 
    estimating changes in stocks in response to land management is more 
    difficult [6, 7].
There are 1.2 million hectares of upland heath within the UK, 
    the majority in Scotland [8]. Upland heath in “favourable 
    condition,” is dominated by dwarf shrubs (>25% cover), typically 
    the evergreen ericoid Calluna vulgaris 
    (hereafter referred to as Calluna), with 
    graminoids and mosses interspersed. This habitat is predominantly 
    underlain by organomineral and organic soils, with organic matter 
    up to c. 0.5 m deep. The average upland heath soil C density is 
    89.9 t ha−1 in the top 15 cm of the soil 
    [9], representing a national C stock of 108 M tonnes and 
    significantly more if total soil depth is accounted for. Given the 
    importance of this habitat as a C store, we need to understand the 
    consequences of different land management practices for C 
    sequestration and storage.
Upland heath is traditionally managed by low intensity grazing 
    and rotational burning, creating a mosaic of different aged 
    Calluna stands, providing young, nutritious 
    plants for all-year round forage and older, larger plants as cover 
    for wildlife, notably important bird species [10]. Upland heath has 
    suffered significant decline and although its total extent has 
    stabilised in recent years, its condition remains variable [8, 11]. 
    Much is currently in “unfavourable condition,” characterised by the 
    replacement of dwarf shrubs with graminoids, typically as a result 
    of over grazing and/or poor burning practice [12]. One graminoid 
    which commonly becomes dominant is Nardus 
    stricta (hereafter referred to as 
    Nardus), a tussock-forming perennial grass of 
    low nutritional value which is less preferred than 
    Calluna by grazing animals [13, 14]. The 
    dominance of Nardus over large areas is thus of less benefit to 
    agriculture and biodiversity conservation than a 
    Calluna sward.
Change in plant species composition can influence ecosystem C 
    dynamics [15–20]. Calluna, an evergreen shrub, 
    exhibits a slow growth rate [21] and produces long-lived leaves, 
    with low N content and high concentrations of phenolics [22, 23] 
    and lignified woody stem material. Thus, Calluna 
    litter is recalcitrant, resisting decomposition and reducing soil 
    respiration. Graminoids exhibit contrasting traits, with faster 
    growth enabling rapid C assimilation but also resulting in greater 
    C loss through plant respiration [16]. Faster growing species also 
    tend to produce leaves with shorter lifespan and higher N content, 
    thus, generating large amounts of litter and increasing rates of 
    decomposition and subsequently soil respiration [23, 24]. Shifts in 
    abundance of subdominant functional groups following change in 
    dominant species may also influence C dynamics; metabolically 
    active herb species have labile plant litter which is easily 
    decomposable, whereas moss species are slow growing and produce 
    recalcitrant litter [25]. Thus, a shift between 
    Calluna and Nardus dominance 
    of upland heath could alter the C balance of the system; it would 
    be predicted that a Calluna-dominated system 
    would be a stronger carbon sink than a 
    Nardus-dominated sward.
This study employs an in situ 
    13CO2 pulse 
    labelling experiment to compare C assimilation and retention in 
    upland heath plant communities dominated by 
    Calluna and by Nardus. We 
    investigate which plant fractions are most important for 
    CO2 uptake and which most strongly retain 
    assimilate over six weeks during the growing season. Due to 
    differences in relative growth rate and rate of decomposition, we 
    hypothesise that there will be higher assimilation of 
    13CO2, but also a 
    faster turnover and subsequent lower retention of assimilate in the 
    Nardus-compared to the 
    Calluna-dominated communities.
2. Materials and Methods
2.1 Site Description
Experimental work was carried out at Glensaugh Research Farm, SE 
    Grampian Highlands, Scotland (56°54′ N, 2°34′ W). The site is at 
    365–390 m altitude with a mean annual temperature of 7.5°C and 
    precipitation of 1131 mm [31]. The soil is a podzol with an organic 
    horizon of 30–60 cm depth. The experimental site is lightly grazed 
    all year round by sheep (1.1 ewes ha−1) 
    and by cattle during the summer (0.25 cattle 
    ha−1). The main plant community is 
    Calluna-Vaccinium myrtillus (hereafter, 
    Vaccinium) heath (NVC H12) [32]. The 
    Calluna sward is approximately eight years old 
    and in the building phase of its growth cycle [10]. At this site, 
    the Calluna-dominated vegetation forms a mosaic 
    with graminoid-dominated vegetation, characterised as 
    Nardus-Galium saxatile grassland (NVC U5) [33]. 
    The moss, Hypnum jutlandicum, was abundant in 
    both vegetation communities.
2.2 Experimental Design
In May 2009, five blocks were established within an area of 
    approximately 80 × 80 m, with blocks being >10 m apart. Paired 
    plots (40 cm diameter, >5 m apart) of representative 
    Calluna-dominated and 
    Nardus-dominated vegetation communities were 
    established within each block. At each plot, a stainless steel 
    collar was driven into the soil (to ~3 cm) to create a small 
    trench, allowing for placement of a collar during labelling.
2.3 In Situ 
    13CO2 Pulse 
    Labeling
At three of the blocks stainless steel collars (40 cm diameter, 
    12 cm height) were slotted into the trenches around each plot. A 
    transparent bell-shaped chamber (BELL060101, Haxnicks; 36 cm 
    height, 40 cm diameter, and 28 l volume) was placed onto a rubber 
    seal (to ensure a closed headspace) on top of each collar. Each 
    chamber was equipped with a pair of 12 V DC fans (Sunon, 1.1 W) to 
    ensure adequate mixing of headspace gas and two suba-seals at 
    opposite sides of the chamber for injection of 
    13CO2.
Labelling took place during 10.00–17.00 h on the 3rd of June 
    2009. a Few drops of 1 M HCl were 
    injected into 1.25 g of 99% 13C-enriched 
    sodium bicarbonate (NaH 
    13CO3) in a gas 
    tight jar. 5 cm3 of the 
    13CO2 evolved was 
    injected into each side of the chamber, creating a 
    CO2 concentration of 1-2 times ambient. This 
    was repeated approximately every 30 min for a total of 12 
    additions. To avoid overheating, chambers were removed just prior 
    to each addition to enable mixing with ambient air. During 
    labelling, temperature within the chambers remained between 22 and 
    30°C for 80% of the time, and photosynthetic active radiation 
    ranged from 470 to 1900 μmol 
    m−2 s−1.
2.4 CO2 Flux Measurements
CO2 flux was measured on the two 
    nonlabelled adjacent blocks during labelling and on all three 
    labelled blocks 6 days after labelling. Measurements were made with 
    a dynamic open system (air flow 50 l 
    min−1) comprising custom built 
    transparent chambers (28 l, 40 cm diameter) attached to EGM-4 
    infrared gas analyser (PP Systems, Hansatech, UK). Net ecosystem 
    exchange (NEE) and total ecosystem respiration 
    (RTOT) (using a blackout 
    hood) were measured over 30 minutes each, recording 2 minute 
    averages, and gross primary production (GPP) was calculated as the 
    difference between NEE and 
    (RTOT (e.g., [20]). In 
    data presentation, CO2 assimilated is shown 
    as negative, and CO2 emitted is shown as 
    positive.
2.5 Sampling and Harvesting
Shoot and root biomass were sampled from each plot immediately 
    after labelling on day 0 (initial allocation) and on days 15 and 
    42. Above- and below-ground plant materials were collected away 
    from the labelled plots for the determination of 
    13C natural abundance. On days 0 and 15, 
    four young stems of ericaceous shrubs (Calluna 
    and Vaccinium) were sampled from each 
    Calluna-dominated plot and split into leaf and 
    stem (3-4 year old) tissues. Older Calluna stems 
    (>4 years, comprising 30% of total stem biomass) were not 
    sampled to avoid damaging the remaining plant. Small samples of 
    moss (Hypnum jutlandicum) and graminoid leaves 
    (mainly Nardus) were also taken from these 
    plots. From the Nardus-dominated plots, 
    graminoid leaves, moss, and herbs (Galium 
    saxatile and Potentilla erecta) were 
    sampled. Two soil cores (2.1 cm diameter, 10.5 cm depth) were taken 
    from each plot for root samples. After 42 days, all above-ground 
    vegetation and further four soil cores were taken from each 
    plot.
2.6 Growth Assumptions
To determine the amount of 13C 
    initially taken up in each plot and subsequently retained, back 
    calculations were made from final biomass (day 42) to estimate 
    biomass of each component of the vegetation at day 0 (= final mass 
    −42 * daily production estimate) and day 15 (= final mass–27 * 
    daily production estimate). Production estimates for ericaceous 
    shrubs, herbs, and roots were obtained from the literature (Table 
    1). Due to the warm, dry weather, moss growth was assumed to be 
    negligible over the 6-week experiment [34]. Production estimates 
    for graminoids were obtained from field measurements. Graminoid 
    shoots (n = 60) in both 
    Calluna- and Nardus-dominated 
    areas were tagged and their length was measured on days 0, 15, and 
    42. Mean initial : final length ratio provided an estimate of 
    growth rate.
 Table 1: Production 
    estimates used for back calculating initial biomass from final 
    biomass. Data are derived from annual production estimates from the 
    literature with the exception of Calluna. For 
    Calluna, the June and July production 
    proportions [26] were applied to an annual estimate of production 
    [27]. All data have been converted to g 
    m−2 day−1.
2.7 13C Analysis
Samples were divided into the following plant fractions: 
    Calluna leaf, Calluna stem 
    (up to c. 4 years), Vaccinium leaf, 
    Vaccinium stem, moss, graminoid leaf, herbs, and 
    roots. Leaf samples were taken from current year’s growth. Roots 
    were extracted from soil cores by washing and sieving (2 mm sieve). 
    Samples were dried at 80°C for 48 hours, weighed, and finely ground 
    in a ball mill. Subsamples (2–5 mg) were analysed for 
    13C on an elemental analyser linked to a 
    mass spectrometer. Samples from day 0, day 15, and natural 
    abundance were analysed on an ANCA GSL prep unit connected to a 
    Europa Scientific 20-20 stable isotope analyser (Sercon, Crewe, 
    UK); day 42 samples were analysed on a Flash EA 1112 Series 
    Elemental Analyser connected via a Conflo III to a 
    DeltaPlus XP isotope ratio mass 
    spectrometer (Thermo Finnigan, Bremen, Germany). Appropriate 
    cross-calibration was undertaken to ensure comparability of 
    data.
2.8 Stable Isotope Calculations and Data Analysis
The 13C signatures of the natural 
    abundance samples were within the expected range for a C3 plant 
    assemblage [35]. To calculate the 13C 
    atom % excess of the labelled samples, the natural abundance values 
    were subtracted from the enriched values. The amount of 
    13C was calculated as biomass multiplied 
    by percent C, multiplied by the atom % excess.
2.9 Statistical Analysis
Biomass data were analysed using ANOVA. 
    CO2 flux data were analysed using linear 
    mixed models with flux (NEE, 
    RTOT, and GPP) as fixed 
    and plot nested within block, as random variables. Flux data from 
    the two sampling days were combined as there was no significant 
    difference between days. The analysis of 
    13C data (both enrichment and content) 
    was performed separately for photosynthetic tissues 
    (Calluna leaf, Vaccinium leaf 
    and stem, graminoid leaf, moss and herb) and nonphotosynthetic 
    tissues (Calluna stem and roots). Linear mixed 
    models, with repeated measures, were used to analyse the effect of 
    time since 13C pulse and plant fraction 
    on 13C enrichment. Vegetation community 
    was added in the analysis of 13C 
    enrichment of plant fractions common to both communities and in 
    comparison of 13C pools between 
    communities. Time was used as a fixed repeated (autoregression 1) 
    factor, with plot the subject of the repeated factor. Plot was also 
    nested within block and used as a random factor. Type 1 sum of 
    squares was used in all models. The residuals of linear mixed 
    models were checked for normality. Post hoc testing was performed 
    using LSD pairwise comparisons based on a significant main effect. 
    All data were analysed using statistical package IBM SPSS 
    statistics (version 19). Due to thein situ 
    nature of our experiment, the number of species and thus number of 
    C pools and fluxes between pools within the system, our data did 
    not enable modelling as in Street et al. [36].
