Scotland 's polar bears to show pandas how it 's done 

by TRISTAN STEWART-ROBERTSON AND MIKE MERRITT 
ONE of the bear necessities in life is a mate – and Scotland 's polar variety could be about to show the nation 's pandas how it 's done when it comes to breeding . 
A girlfriend has been selected from a " dating agency " search for male polar bears Walker and Arktos in the hope of producing the first cubs born in the UK in nearly 25 years . 
Earlier this month , it was revealed that Edinburgh Zoo panda Tian Tian was artificially inseminated after failing to mate naturally with Yang Guang . 
But staff at the Highland Wildlife Park near Kingussie now hope their polar bears will prove more successful . 
Douglas Richardson , the park 's animal collections manager , said a suitable female had been singled out at Amsterdam Zoo by the Polar Bear Special Committee for the European Association of Zoos and Aquaria . 
Mr Richardson said : " It is a bit like a dating agency for polar bears . She is five years old and is a good genetic match . We are very pleased with her and accepted her in principle . Other stakeholders in the breeding programme are now being advised to make sure they have no objections . 
" They could have some information that we are unaware of , such as over the health of the bear . But all seems fine at this stage . She seems fit and healthy , was bred in captivity and has not been used for breeding before . All being well we hope to have her here next year . " 
Walker , who will be six years old this year , has been at the Highland Wildlife Park for four years since arriving from Rhenen Zoo in the Netherlands . Fellow male Arktos , who is a year older , was brought in to keep him company in 2012 . 
Walker is now old enough to mate , so the Royal Zoological Society of Scotland , which runs the park as well as Edinburgh Zoo , is moving ahead with its polar bear breeding programme . 
The female , who will weigh between 440 lbs and 600 lbs depending on the time of year , will be housed in a new enclosure costing up to £ 400,000 . 
Mr Richardson added : " It is likely that Arktos will be the first male to be chosen to mate . But he will only spend about three weeks with her because male polar bears are high risk for females . It is likely it would try and kill any cub too . " 
Walker and Arktos , the only polar bears in a public collection in the UK , have been responsible for around a 50 per cent increase in the park 's numbers which have seen visitors double to 136,000 a year over the last five years . 
A cub is likely to boost visitor numbers and takings considerably , and Mr Richardson stressed that the cash generated would be ploughed back into conservation . 
Walker found fame in his first days when it emerged that he was one of two cubs at the centre of a controversy over the BBC 's Frozen Planet series in 2011 . 
An episode featured cubs in a den with their mother and viewers assumed the footage was from the Arctic – however , it was filmed in captivity . 
