Ryan Wilson fined over Glasgow takeaway assaults
by ASHLIE McANALLY
A RUGBY star dressed as Batman who assaulted another 
    player on a Halloween night out has been fined £750. 
Ryan Wilson, 25, who plays for Glasgow Warriors, pulled Gavin 
    Quinn from a seat in a takeaway then punched Glasgow Hawk Ally 
    Maclay, who was dressed as Tweedledee.
Other people in fancy dress – including a man dressed as a red 
    crayon and another as a cartoon Minion – were nearby as the 
    incident unfolded.
Mr Maclay, 30, said “leave it Batman” after 
    learning Wilson had grabbed his friend by his jumper and pulled him 
    from a seat in the Barbeque Kings kebab shop on to the floor.
The former Hawks captain was hit and ended up on the floor with 
    Wilson and Mr Quinn and several others around them.
Ryan Grant, 29, a Glasgow Warrior and British Lion, was accused 
    with Wilson and fellow Warrior Rory Hughes, 21, of kicking and 
    stamping on Mr Maclay to his severe injury on 27 October 2013 at 
    the Glasgow West End restaurant.
After falling to the ground, the PE teacher was left dazed, with 
    a fractured eye socket and bloodied face.
Following a trial at Glasgow Sheriff Court, the jury yesterday 
    found Wilson guilty of punching Mr Maclay, but not of kicking and 
    stamping on him, and found the charge against the other two accused 
    not proven.
After the judgment, Mark Dodson, chief executive of Scottish 
    Rugby, said: “This has been a wholly regrettable episode. 
    Regardless of the verdict, there is absolutely no place in the 
    game, on or off the pitch, for the sort of behaviour that has led 
    to criminal proceedings being taken.”
Mr Dodson said Wilson has now been suspended, adding: 
    “Scottish Rugby will be considering at board level what 
    further action is appropriate and will make an announcement in due 
    course.”
Fining Wilson £250 for assaulting Mr Quinn and £500 for the 
    assault on Mr Maclay, Sheriff Martin Jones QC told the rugby player 
    that both assaults “appeared to be unprovoked”, were within a short 
    time of one another and came after drinking alcohol.
He added: “There’s nothing unusual about that 
    situation.”
During the trial, Wilson admitted assaulting Mr Quinn, by 
    pulling him on to the floor.
The court heard Wilson wanted to sit in the booth beside Mr 
    Quinn so he could speak to his rugby colleague, Richie Vernon – who 
    was dressed as a shark – but he was told to go away.
Wilson put his foot on the table in a bid to climb over into the 
    seat, but Mr Quinn pushed it away.
He then grabbed hold of Mr Quinn and pulled him from the seat on 
    to the floor, and there was a struggle between the men which 
    “fizzled off”.
Mr Maclay then came in to the takeaway and was told by his 
    friend what had happened.
When Mr Quinn spoke again to Wilson, Mr Maclay said 
    “Leave it Batman” before he was punched by Wilson 
    and fell to the ground.
He grabbed Mr Quinn as he stumbled back and Wilson landed on the 
    floor with them.
Mr Maclay told the jury he was repeatedly struck and went into 
    the foetal position in an attempt to protect his face from 
    “numerous blows”.
He added: “There was one blow in particular that caught 
    me right in the eye – not sure whether it was a kick or a punch or 
    what it was.”
The victim said that was when he knew “that wasn’t quite 
    right”.
Witnesses spoke of the fracas ending quite quickly although 
    nobody saw any direct contact with Mr Maclay.
Euan Fraser, a Hawks fan, said he pulled Grant away from the 
    crowd. Mr Fraser alleged Hughes later told him “Shut the 
    f*** up or I will stab you” when he branded Hughes and 
    Grant “a disgrace”, believing Grant was involved.
A statement from Glasgow Hawks said: “We note the two not 
    proven and one guilty verdict. The club sees this as a conclusion 
    to the matter and wish to draw a line under the matter.”
