Victory for opponents as Tressady Wind Farm application is 
    turned down

THE potential impact on Sutherland residents’ lives saw 
    councillors throw out plans for a 13-turbine wind farm on the 
    Tressady Estate, near Rogart.
Despite officials recommending Wind Prospect Developments’ 
    scheme for approval, Highland Council’s north planing committee 
    voted 7-2 to reject it today, following a site visit 24 hours 
    earlier.
The turbines would have been 115-metres high within the Strath 
    Fleet watershed between the hilltops of Cnoc na Fardaich to the 
    north-west and Cnoc na h Uaighe to the south-east, but councillors 
    were alarmed at its proximity to residents’ homes.
East Sutherland and Edderton councillor Graham Phillips – who 
    had demanded the site visit last month after one local resident was 
    in tears explaining to him how the noise from nearby turbines 
    blighted his life – led the move to reject the application by 
    tabling the successful motion.
Thirty objections had been lodged, with the growing number of 
    wind farms in the area, potential noise pollution and already 
    operational Kilbraur wind farm highlighted.
Rogart Community Council had not objected but voiced concern 
    over the number of similar projects.
Councillor Phillips said he could not support the development 
    because of the potential effect on local people and said its 
    supporters were those whose families could make money out of it or 
    who flagged up the financial benefits for the wider community.
He said the terrain would probably have been left untouched as 
    designated “wild land” if previous development had not taken 
    place.
“Where we were actually seeing (on the site visit) would 
    be wild land if it hadn’t been muddled by the land down the road at 
    Kilbraur,” he said. “The landscape is largely 
    empty.”
Caithness councillor Donnie Mackay said there was already too 
    many turbines in the area. “It is some lovely scenery and I 
    think we would be spoiling that scenery; the other point is that 
    it’s so close to the houses,” he said.
But Wick councillor Bill Fernie and Dingwall member Angela 
    MacLean, who had “sympathy” with local people but thought there was 
    enough space for the turbines, supported the major renewable 
    development.
“I am surprised to see that the area is ‘intensely 
    occupied’ in a rural area of Sutherland,” said Councillor 
    Fernie, who claimed the authority would have described it as a 
    “sparsely populated” if it was applying for some form of grant for 
    another issue.
Councillor MacLean added: “While I can have sympathy for 
    the objectors we have policies so we can follow them.”
Councillor Phillips said last month that one constituent had 
    been in tears explaining how the drone from turbines at the 
    Kilbraur wind farm disturbed him.
“He lives exactly half-way between where Tressady would 
    go and Kilbraur and the resident described it like a generator over 
    the fence,” said Councillor Phillips.
After hearing of the decision, Sophie Nioche, development 
    manager for the Tressady Wind Farm proposal, said: “We’re 
    extremely disappointed by today’s decision. We will review the 
    decision notice once it’s published and consider the next steps to 
    take.”
