Schools to install high-intensity sun ray lights to keep 
    pupils awake

Bright idea could keep pupils alert.
Schools are being encouraged to install intense new lights 
    designed to mimic the rays of the sun – to help kids stay awake in 
    class.
The Conservatives have asked the Scottish Government to look at 
    the example of classrooms in northern Sweden by turning to 
    eco-friendly “full spectrum” bulbs which are said to boost levels 
    of concentration and happiness.
The electric lights emit a metallic glow believed to combat 
    jet-lag symptoms brought on by gloomy winter weather and dreary 
    dark days.
Kids are then far more awake in lessons, and unaffected by 
    seasonal affective disorder (SAD), which scientists attribute to a 
    lack of daylight.
Conservative politicians believe there is an argument for 
    placing them in schools across the country.
A spokesman said: “It should be up to schools to decide 
    but bright ideas from other countries which keep pupils and 
    students interested and motivated in class are always 
    welcome.
“In this case, it seems a very bright idea 
    indeed.”
The bulbs are currently being tested in classrooms in Sweden’s 
    far north, where daylight-robbed residents get just six hours of 
    sunlight a day.
According to experts, natural light tells the brain to halt the 
    production of melatonin – the hormone that makes you feel tired.
With a lack of light, these hormones multiply, leading to 
    feelings of drowsiness and 
    jet-leg like symptoms. These new bulbs combat that by 
    emitting rays with a similar wavelength and intensity to that of 
    the sun, but obviously without the heat. In turn, the body’s 
    biological clock is kept in sync and allows pupils to feel far more 
    awake throughout the day.
Dr Mariana Figueiro, of the Lighting Research Centre at New 
    York’s Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, insisted that by 
    experiencing the bright light first thing in the morning, kids are 
    ensuring their body is kept on its correct cycle.
She said: “It’s very important to get a signal in the 
    morning to reset your biological clock.”
The research in Sweden’s “Aurora” classrooms is the first of its 
    type.
Moa Karlsson, 23, a researcher at Stockholm University, said: 
    “The room acts as a substitute for going out for a walk in 
    the sunshine – that’s how it made me feel.”
Singer Natalie Imbruglia, 39, famously suffered with SAD when 
    she moved from to London from 
    Australia, while more than two million people are diagnosed with 
    condition every year in the UK.
To counter the onset of the depressive illness, Manchester 
    United legend Sir Alex Ferguson, 73, even installed sunbeds at the 
    club’s training complex to boost his players’ vitamin D levels 
    during the winter months.
The Scottish Government said changes to classroom lighting 
    “are a matter for local school management”.
