Patrick 's heart surgery was his only chance 

Young Patrick Convery is a bit of a daredevil . 
Judo , abseiling , diving – his hero 's Tom Daley – you name it , he 's into it . 
He 's also got the kind of smile that seems to say : " You see as soon as your back 's turned . . . " ! 
Which makes it all the more incredible that in September , 2007 , Patrick underwent nine and a half hours of lifesaving heart surgery . 
He was just 11 weeks old , but a combination of heart problems meant he weighed just two kilos , half his birthweight . 
" The first couple of days after he was born , it was very warm weather and I remember saying : ' It 's a bit strange his hands are so cold , ' " recalls dad , Shane . 
" It was 30 °C outside , but we had gloves and blankets on him , and his breathing was very quick . 
" I 'd taken his brother Jake , who was one , to the zoo , because his mum , Gabby , was still in hospital , but the paediatrician had come in and I 'll never forget when Gabby phoned and said : ' He 's got a hole in his heart . ' 
" I had no idea what that meant . 
" It just did n't sound good and as soon as you hear ' heart ' , you panic . 
" We were living in Switzerland , so there were language barriers , " explains Shane . 
" We both speak a bit of German , but it was a whole different vocabulary that you never learn at school that we were having to deal with , all the medical terms . 
" We were carrying dictionaries around trying to understand what was being said because they were speaking in German , French and Italian . 
" Gabby had actually been told after Patrick was born that she was lucky because he was sleeping well , but he 'd be in mid-feed and just fall asleep . 
" We were having to drip cold water on his head just to keep him awake long enough to feed because it was taking so much out of him to get enough . 
" He lost a huge amount of weight . 
" That brought its own problems , trying to balance him getting enough calories , but not giving him too much fluid because the heart was n't working well enough to manage and the fluid would just build up . 
" The murmur was so strong , if you put your hand on his chest you could actually feel the vibration , " reveals Shane . 
As well as a large hole in his heart , Patrick also had pulmonary stenosis – which restricts the flow of blood through the heart – so surgery soon became the only option . 
" They told us to go home and come back in five weeks , but we just kept ending up back at the hospital because he was scarily unwell , " says Shane , now living in Edinburgh with Gabby , Jake , Patrick , Danny ( five ) and Robbie , who 's five months . 
" Then after five weeks , they said it was as well we 'd made it that far because doing anything before was really very dicey . 
" They 'd been reluctant to operate on such a small baby , but the cardiologist said we needed to fix this quickly . 
" We were past the point where the risks of proceeding were less than the risks of not . 
" That was a scary way to look at it , the lesser of two evils . 
" Sitting waiting for the surgery was horrific . 
" We could n't give him anything to eat beforehand , so he was crying , but he 'd fall asleep . 
" Then the previous surgery over-ran so that was another waiting game , and then handing Patrick over – it was something you would n't wish on your enemies . 
" Thankfully , my mum and Gabby 's mum came over to help us look after Jake , because the first few months of Patrick 's life were spent in the hospital one day , out the next and back again . 
" Being in hospital with him , surrounded by children with similar problems who were screaming all night and machines going was just very stressful for everyone . " 
Patrick had the hole in his heart patched and the stenosis repaired and now , seven years on , he might be the smallest in his class , but as Shane says : " He does n't let being small stop him ! 
" He has ongoing heart weaknesses and when he gets tired , his breathing gets quite high so we have to monitor that , but he 's got a massive personality to compensate . 
" We try to be quite active and he loves the diving . 
" I 'm scared of it , but he and Jake are scampering up to the eight-metre board – so I 've got to be brave and jump off the five-metre board ! " 
