Duke salutes fallen but warns of present danger

THE DUKE OF CAMBRIDGE marked the 100th anniversary of 
    Britain’s entry into the First World War at an international 
    commemoration service in Belgium yesterday, saying: “We were 
    enemies more than once in the last century, and today we are 
    friends and allies.”
William saluted those who died in the Great War as he addressed 
    the first of a series of events in Belgium attended by heads of 
    state including German president Joachim Gauck.
Delivering a speech in Liege, he said that war between the 
    nations, which claimed the lives of millions between 1914 and 1918, 
    including 750,000 British and Commonwealth troops, was now 
    “unthinkable”.
But he warned that recent events in Ukraine were testament to 
    the fact that “instability continues to stalk our continent”. 
    William was joined by wife Kate at the Allies’ Memorial at Cointe. 
    The duchess, who wore a cream coat dress and pale hat, was seen 
    chatting to French president Francois Hollande before the ceremony 
    started.
Ireland’s president, Michael D Higgins, and Belgium’s King 
    Philippe and Queen Mathilde also attended.
William told the guests: “These trenches have left an 
    indelible scar on your land – they speak of the horrors of war but 
    also of your forebears’ courage.
“That courage was shown not just by your armed forces but 
    by your civilian populations. I know that in the coming months, you 
    will be commemorating the massacre at Dinan and the burning of the 
    great library at Leuven.
“Many nations here today, the United Kingdom among them, 
    owe you a great debt of gratitude for your fortitude and 
    resistance.”
He went on: “The peace that we here enjoy together as 
    allies and partners does not simply mean no more bloodshed – it 
    means something deeper than that. The fact that the presidents of 
    Germany and Austria are here today, and that other nations – then 
    enemies – are here too, bears testimony to the power of 
    reconciliation.
“Not only is war between us unthinkable, but former 
    adversaries have worked together for three generations to spread 
    and entrench democracy, prosperity and the rule of law across 
    Europe, and to promote our shared values around the world. We were 
    enemies more than once in the last century, and today we are 
    friends and allies. We salute those who died to give us our 
    freedom. We will remember them.”
As part of the ceremony, a 10-year-old girl released a white 
    balloon as a sign of peace and reconciliation. At the same time, 
    thousands of other balloons in the colours of the flags of the 
    countries invited to the commemoration were also released.
President Gauck said it was “unjustifiable” for Germany to have 
    invaded Belgium, adding that nationalism “bonded almost everyone’s 
    hearts and minds”. He added: “We are grateful to have been 
    able to live together with peace for so long in Europe.”
Many British military personnel travelled to Belgium to mark the 
    centenary, and spoke of their pride at commemorating their 
    predecessors.
Flight Lieutenant Gavin Brockie and his cousin, Chief Petty 
    Officer Michael Last, attended a ceremony in memory of their 
    great-grandfather, Corporal Walter George Last, 2nd Battalion Royal 
    Irish Regiment, who was killed in action on 23 August, 1914 and is 
    buried at the cemetery.
Flt Lt Brockie said: “Today was a family pilgrimage to 
    the grave of my great-grandfather, Corporal Last, who is buried at 
    St Symphorien.
“To be here in uniform, on the day of the Centenary of 
    the start of the First World War, is an absolute honour, and one I 
    won’t ever forget.”
Sergeant Sean Jones, of the Princess of Wales’s Royal Regiment, 
    who was awarded the Military Cross after showing “unflinching 
    courage” in Afghanistan, said: “It’s a moment of great 
    pride, all these guys from our forebear regiments, mine especially, 
    they died here, and it’s our chance to read or have something to do 
    in their honour.”
The 27-year-old, from Shrewsbury, Shropshire, introduced a 
    reading penned by Lance Corporal Frank Agger, who is buried in the 
    cemetery and was in the Middlesex regiment, one of Sgt Jones’ own 
    regiment’s forebear regiments.
He said: “World War One was brutal, we don’t go in 
    trenches and it isn’t the case you blow a whistle and we get up and 
    off you go.”
Second Lieutenant Luke Sheaf, from the Royal Anglian Regiment, 
    read a diary extract from an anonymous British officer, dated 1919, 
    at the ceremony.
The 26-year-old, from Eynsford, Kent, said: “The chance 
    of being involved in something with this much grandeur is probably 
    not going to happen again in my time in the army.”
