Care home boss suspended for watching porn at work 

Written by GEMMA HARTLEY 
A CARE home boss has been suspended after admitting watching porn at work while looking after vulnerable adults . 
David Campbell , deputy manager of Ashlea House care home in Callander , near Stirling , has been suspended for 12 months by health watchdogs . 
A panel at The Nursing and Midwifery Council ( NMC ) described his behaviour as " wholly inappropriate . " 
Mr Campbell admitted that whilst on duty , he " accessed one or more websites containing pornograhpic content " . 
He did not attend the disciplinary hearing in Edinburgh yesterday but apologised for " the problems he caused " . 
The NMC panel heard that Mr Campbell had accessed several " pornographic " pages half an hour before the end of his shift . 
Case Presenter for the NMC , Jane Burgess , revealed that two colleagues discovered the pages on a shared computer . They checked the rota to find Campbell was the only member of staff on duty that day who needed access to the computer . 
She said : " On January 16 , at 21.30 pm he accessed sites on the work computer , half an hour before the end of the shift at 10 pm . 
" On January 31 , two members of staff , noticed the history showed inappropriate content . 
" Colleague A took a photograph on her phone and looked at the rota to find out who had access to the computer at that time . 
" She then reported her concerns to colleague C . 
" Colleague C reported this to the police and care inspectorate . " 
Mr Campbell had been in the post from 2011 but quit his job in April 2013 before the completion of an internal disciplinary process . 
The case was first called before the NMC in September last year , after it was alleged he had accessed inappropriate images of ' granny porn ' . 
Care home watchdog the Care Inspectorate conducted its own probe into the home , when it was noted that the computer 's history had been deleted . 
But police had found a picture of the screen showing titles of pornographic sites which had been accessed . 
Mrs Burgess added : " Police stated that they had taken charge of the computer . 
" They said the history had been deleted . 
" And no harm had been found to have happened to any of the residents in care . 
" No further criminal action was taken . " 
At the previous hearing Campbell sent a written denial of the allegation . 
In a report last August , the care inspectorate concluded there was " sufficient evidence to assess that on the balance of probabilities the deputy manager did access the websites while at work " . 
However , he admitted deleting the internet history after being spoken to by the home manager about the incident . 
Chairwoman for the NMC , Anne Booth , said : " The registrant 's behaviour was wholly inappropriate in that he accessed pornography whilst at work on work 's computer , whilst on duty . 
" The only qualified nurse on duty at the time and therefore the only responsible nurse on duty at the home . 
" There is no evidence that any harm has come to any residents in his care . 
" However , it is noted that the registrant works with vulnerable adults . " 
" We are satisfied that his fitness to practice has been impaired by misconduct . 
" The appropriate sanction in this case is a 12-month suspension order . " 
Ashlea House , which is part of a group of care homes owned by Mauricare Drumpark Limited . 
It cares for up to 25 residents , some of whom have physical and learning disabilities . 
