Tourism strategy launch 
Written by Sarah Rollo 
TOURISM providers are being invited to the launch of a new plan aimed at attracting more visitors to Moray . 

The Moray Tourism Strategy will be unveiled on Friday , March 7 , at an event which will enable those in the industry to meet each other and share new ideas and innovations . 
' Bitesize ' bus tours giving an overview of what is available to visitors will be offered , and there will be workshops and guest speakers . 
The Moray Economic Partnership ( MEP ) is behind Moray Tourism Link 2014 and its chair , Councillor John Cowe , will open the event . 
Visit Scotland 's chief executive , Malcolm Roughead , will talk about ' The Visitor Economy ' , before HIE ( Highlands and Islands Enterprise ) Moray 's Andrew Anderson , who is the programme manager for the area 's Tourism and Culture Group , launches the strategy . 
Councillor Cowe invited all those in the industry to attend . " This event will provide a great networking opportunity for anyone involved in the tourism industry and to seek new ideas , gain expert knowledge and meet like-minded people , " he said . 
" By working together and sharing knowledge , it will build a stronger tourism offer in Moray . " 
The event , funded by Business Gateway and HIE , will include workshops in customer care , e-hospitality , and digital tourism . 
Participants can also choose from a selection of three bus tours aimed at highlighting exciting attractions in the area . 
Those unable to attend for the whole day can book either the morning or afternoon session , and people can bring along small promotional material to showcase what they do . 
Margery McLennan , chair of MEP 's Tourism and Culture strand , said : " The strategy will rely on all those in the industry in Moray – our ambassadors – working together to develop a strong focussed approach to bring visitors to our beautiful region . 
" It is always valuable to see new initiatives in the industry and to get a taste of the visitor experience which can be passed on to tourists and we are delighted to be able to do this through funding from HIE and Business Gateway . " 
The free event takes place in the Alexander Graham Bell Centre at Moray College UHI , from 8.45 am to 4.30 pm . Refreshments and a packed lunch will be provided . 
To book , visit www.moraytourismlink2014.eventbrite.co.uk or call 03001234561 by 4 pm on February 28 . 
