Mixed relay event put a smile on the faces of spectators 
    and athletes alike

Triathletes add to their legion of armchair 
    fans.
I was fortunate enough to see nine different events at the 
    London Olympics in 2012, eight of which were sports I was watching 
    live for the very first time.
The one which really stayed with me, and something I’ve been to 
    see again in the aftermath, was triathlon. I’m not alone. Triathlon 
    is the fastest growing sport in the UK and Britons made up two of 
    the top four in both the men and women’s world triathlon series in 
    2013.
It can be an unusual event, and the only sport I can think of 
    where an ability to get undressed quickly is a key component of the 
    race, but those moments where it resembles a round in the 
    Generation Game quickly give way to admiration for the incredible 
    endurance of the competitors.
At the women’s event in Hyde Park in 2012, Sweden’s Lisa Norden 
    failed to win gold because, after swimming for 30 minutes, cycling 
    for an hour and running for 40 minutes, she failed to time her dip 
    for the line properly in a sprint finish with the Swiss Nicola 
    Spirig.
The ebb and flow of a race where athletes who are poor swimmers 
    can make up time if they’re good cyclists or runners, and vice 
    versa, makes for an exciting spectator event although I take issue 
    with BBC presenter Sonali Shah’s analysis that “many of the 
    spectators here and the people watching us back home will be doing 
    a triathlon in their spare time this weekend.” I’m fine watching 
    other people doing it in my armchair, thanks, and I’m sure most of 
    the fantastic crowd cheering on the athletes in Strathclyde Country 
    Park are with me on that.
Not resting on their laurels, the authorities have come up with 
    a new format to thrill the non-participants, the mixed relay event 
    consisting of four “supersprint” triathlons, which made its 
    Commonwealth Games bow on Saturday.
With the main rivals to the English team of Jonny and Alistair 
    Brownlee, Vicky Holland and Jodie Stimpson being either Spanish or 
    injured the only thing that could stop them from winning gold was a 
    collective round of neck ache from wearing their Olympic, World 
    Championship and Commonwealth medals.
All four had won medals in their individual event 48 hours 
    before (two golds, a silver and a bronze), which commentator Annie 
    Emmerson concluded “makes it very difficult for the other 
    teams.”
If you were thinking that swimming, cycling and running for two 
    hours on Thursday would make them tired, Annie had news for us.
“The problem for the athletes is that they are used to 
    racing over two hours so it takes them a while to get warmed up.” 
    This meant that by the end of the 250 metre swim, eight kilometre 
    bike ride and one mile run they’d be “raring to go.”
If we needed any more confirmation that these were human beings 
    cut from a different cloth, New Zealand’s Nicky Samuels runs with a 
    permanent smile on her face
After the first three members of the England team had built up a 
    handy lead, Alistair Brownlee was a little too raring to get going 
    as he set off on the final leg and the BBC cameras caught his foot 
    over the start line.
“Are we about to get notice of a 15 second 
    penalty?” asked Matt Chilton, suddenly thinking we might 
    have a race on our hands.
“It’s a family trait,” chirped in Steve Trew, 
    referring to a similar penalty that hit younger brother Jonny in 
    the Olympics (he still won bronze).
On this occasion, Alistair escaped punishment and was allowed to 
    walk over the line, grinning broadly, high-fiving the spectators 
    and collecting flags in the same way he had done in the men’s 
    individual race on Thursday.
“He’s barely broken sweat,” said Chilton.
I was exhausted sitting in the armchair at the end of the hour 
    and 15 minutes on such a hot day but Alistair really did look 
    raring to go.
