 Wave of refugees fleeing IS floods Turkish town
by DESMOND BUTLER IN SURUC, 
    TURKEY
ABOUT 130,000 Syrian refugees fleeing the advance of 
    Islamic State militants have crossed the border into Turkey in the 
    past four days, Turkey’s deputy prime minister said yesterday, 
    warning that the number could rise further as the militants 
    continue their onslaught.
Numan Kurtulmus warned that the number could rise to become 
    “a refugee wave that can be expressed [in] hundreds of 
    thousands”.
The refugees have been flooding into Turkey since Thursday, 
    escaping an Islamic State offensive that has pushed the conflict 
    close to the Turkish border. The conflict in Syria had already seen 
    more than a million people flee across the border in the past three 
    years.
“This is not a natural disaster… What we are faced with 
    is a man-made disaster,” said Mr Kurtulmus, adding that 
    Turkey was taking measures to prepare.
“We don’t know how many more villages may be raided, how 
    many more people may be forced to seek refuge.
“An uncontrollable force at the other side of the border 
    is attacking civilians. The extent of the disaster is worse than a 
    natural disaster.”
The situation has raised tensions between Turkish authorities 
    and Kurds in the country, who claim the government is hampering 
    their efforts to help their brethren in Syria.
New clashes erupted along the border gate near the town of Suruc 
    yesterday, with police firing tear gas and water cannon to disperse 
    Kurds protesting against the Turkish government and demanding to 
    reach Syria.
Suruc itself was flooded with refugees and armoured military 
    vehicles.
Islamic State has in recent days advanced into Kurdish regions 
    of Syria that border Turkey, where refugees fleeing on Sunday 
    reported atrocities that included stonings, beheadings and the 
    torching of homes.
On Saturday, Turkey secured the release of 49 hostages who were 
    held by the group for more than three months.
US Secretary of State John Kerry said yesterday that the United 
    States now expects Turkey to step up in the fight against the 
    militants.
Turkey had previously been reluctant to take part in 
    international efforts against the group, citing the safety of its 
    citizens who were captured when the group overran the Iraqi city of 
    Mosul in June.
Officials have refused to reveal how Turkey managed to secure 
    the release of the hostages.
President Recep Tayyip Erdogan has denied paying a ransom, but 
    has been vague on whether there was a prisoner swap.
Yesterday, fighting between Kurdish fighters and the militants 
    raged on near the northern city of Kobani, which is also known as 
    Ayn Arab, the Britain-based Syrian Observatory for Human Rights 
    said.
The Observatory said the militants have lost at least 21 
    fighters since Sunday night, most of them on the southern outskirts 
    of Kobani.
Nawaf Khalil, a spokesman for Syria’s Kurdish Democratic Union 
    Party, said that the situation on the ground “is better than 
    before”.  He added that the main Kurdish force in Syria, known as 
    the People’s Protection Units, had pushed IS fighters about six 
    miles away from their previous positions east of Kobani.
“We will fight until the last gunman in Kobani,” 
    Mr Khalil said. 
