Scandal of elderly killed in care homes

Safety failings are leading to elderly residents being 
    seriously injured or even killed in Britain’s care 
    homes.
People have died after leaping or falling from insecure windows 
    while one resident was left wheelchair-bound after they fell down 
    stairs after being drugged and left unattended.
There are also many cases of people suffocating after getting 
    trapped between their mattress and the safety rails used to stop 
    them falling out of bed.
The details, provided by the Health and Safety Executive, reveal 
    more than 100 companies have been slated for failings.
Care firms have also been fined more than £1 million for 
    flouting safety rules.
Caroline Abrahams, Charity Director at Age UK, said: “Any 
    occurrence of older people dying from avoidable accidents or 
    preventable harm is truly shocking and unacceptable. These 
    incidents underline the need for robust inspection and swift action 
    when problems are identified. These stories must cease. We need to 
    stop failing our most vulnerable.”
Since 2011, the HSE has served almost 250 notices on more than 
    100 companies in Britain for safety failings. Scottish firms 
    received 53 notices while those in England were given 174 and 20 
    were handed out to Welsh companies.
The majority were improvement notices, which order firms to make 
    changes by a certain date. In addition, 18 companies have been 
    fined a total of £1,245,600 for safety failings.
Three companies were found guilty of failings related to 
    residents who died when they became trapped between their mattress 
    or headboard and bed rails.
New Century Care Ltd was fined £165,000 in 2012 after Elsie 
    Beals, 93, died after she became trapped between her mattress and 
    incorrectly-fitted bed rails at Aden Court Care Home, in West 
    Yorkshire, in 2010.
Similarly, Elizabeth Roberts, 89, suffocated in her room at the 
    Headlands Nursing Home, in Llangollen, Wales in 2008 after she got 
    trapped between the mattresses and bed rails. Owners Deevale 
    Homecare and Services Ltd were fined £70,000 in 2011 as a 
    result.
Sue Ryder Care was fined £65,000 in 2011 after 40-year-old 
    Charlotte Young, who had Huntingdon’s disease, died at the Sue 
    Ryder Care Home in Bamber Bridge, Lancashire after becoming trapped 
    between a mattress and a bed rail in 2008.
Since 2001, there have been at least 25 bed rail related deaths 
    in the UK, as well as numerous injuries.
The son of a woman who died in similar circumstances in 2001 has 
    blasted the findings. Jim Jobling’s mother Elizabeth, an 
    Alzheimer’s sufferer, suffocated after she caught her neck in a bed 
    rail, while in care at the Beacon Farm Nursing and Residential Home 
    in Cramlington, Northumberland. The company which owned the home at 
    the time was fined £13,000 as a result.
Jim, 72, said: “Care homes need to know how to use these 
    rails safely. These things are supposed to protect people, not kill 
    them.”
A spokesman for the Health and Safety Executive said they 
    provide extensive guidance to care home owners.
“There should be no excuse for care home providers not 
    knowing the standards required to protect the very 
    vulnerable,” he said.
The Care Quality Commission, which regulates homes in England, 
    and the Care Inspectorate, which regulates homes in Scotland, said 
    it is the responsibility of home owners to abide by safety 
    rules.
However, both watchdogs said they take action to make sure 
    improvements happen when they do discover failings or risks to 
    residents.
