Call to halt frivolous motions by MSPs 
Thousands of taxpayers ' pounds are being wasted on " pointless " parliamentary motions , an MSP has claimed . 
Motions are a way for backbench MSPs to raise issues or try to spark debates in the Scottish parliament but Alex Rowley MSP says most are " fairly meaningless " and called for a rethink on the practice . 
New figures from the Scottish Parliament show nearly 10,000 motions have mentioned the word " congratulates " since 1999 , at a cost of around £ 60,000 in administration costs . 
Envisaged as the stepping stones to new laws , MSPs mainly now use motions to congratulate the achievements of local community groups or further their own personal interests . 
The late independent MSP Margo MacDonald nailed the issue of pointless parliamentary motions when she said : " If an MSP wants to congratulate the local bowls club , just send them a card . " 
Among the subjects raised in recent years was whether or not Scotland should have its own Eurovision Song Contest and an MSP 's daughter winning a school prize . 
Holyrood bosses last night insisted the motions system was " useful " but Labour 's Alex Rowley , member for Cowdenbeath , said : " My frustration is what we see is thousands of fairly pointless motions from MSPs where they are congratulating or recognising schools or community groups ' achievements . 
" I am not knocking that recognition , I just do n't know why it has to be done in the parliament , clogging up the bureaucracy we have here . There must be another way of achieving that and leaving the parliament and its MSPs to concentrate on the issues which constituents are really worried about . 
" It 's frankly a bit of a game and we should be asking questions about what are we doing with our time in this place . People will say I am just in the door , and I do n't think my view is popular with colleagues , but I do think we need to have a serious think , more generally , about improving the way we work at Holyrood . " 
Figures produced by the parliament 's information service show there was a total of 1,091 parliamentary motions submitted in 2000/01 . By last year this tally had jumped to 3,682 . 
Many are formal motions needed for members to vote on when new legislation is being passed through Holyrood . But a search of the motions database has revealed 9,992 entries include the work " congratulates " , while more than 1,000 are related to lottery funding announcements for local communities . 
The estimated cost of processing a motion ranges from £ 4.67 to £ 5.69 . 
Last year Nationalist MSP Christine Grahame called , through a parliamentary motion , for a review of the system . 
She said : " Congratulatory messages should follow a separate process such as a message board on the parliament 's website or contained in an interactive display in a public area . " 
The total number of motions submitted from May 12 , 1999 to May 10 , 2014 was 29,510 . 
A Scottish Parliament spokeswoman said : " A motion is a way in which members can initiate debate or propose a course of action . While most are not intended for debate , they can be a useful way of drawing attention to a particular local issue or event . " 
In 2002 , SNP MSP Kenneth Gibson used a motion to congratulate Nationalist colleague Colin Campbell on the birth of his eighth grandchild . Six years later he then used the official parliamentary motion system to praise his own daughter for winning a school prize . 
In 2004 , Socialist MSP Carolyn Leckie called on MSPs to back her bid for Scotland to have a separate Eurovision song contest entry . 
In 2006 , Green Party MSP Robin Harper tabled a parliamentary motion urging that releases of balloons be banned , except for scientific purposes . 
In 2008 , Nationalist Christine Grahame asked Holyrood to recognise the talents of rock legends AC/DC and the following year she hit out at the TV coverage of the English cricket team 's Ashes series win over Australia which was " apparently of more importance than the continuing starvation of millions in Niger " . 
Last year Labour backbencher Mary Fee , convener of Holyrood 's equal opportunities committee , lodged a parliamentary motion marking the fact a superhero in the X-Men comic proposed to his boyfriend . 

