Refuse collection teams abused in wake of Glasgow bin 
    lorry crash
REFUSE collecting teams in Glasgow have been subjected 
    to abuse following the bin lorry tragedy which claimed the lives of 
    six people in the city centre.

The city council has confirmed it is aware of at least one 
    instance of crews being abused, with union sources claiming members 
    of the public have shouted "murderers" at cleansing 
    staff.
It emerged yesterday that the identities of the driver and 
    passenger of the bin lorry which crashed with tragic consequences 
    nine days ago were being kept from the public in part for their own 
    protection.
Meanwhile, a teenage victim of the George Square crash has been 
    released from hospital.
The 18-year-old woman was allowed to leave Glasgow Royal 
    Infirmary eight days after being knocked down in the crash.
Three people, including the driver, a 14-year-old girl and a 
    woman are still being treated in hospital. Two females, the girl 
    and a woman aged 64, are all being cared for at Glasgow Royal 
    Infirmary.
One senior trade union source said: "The main 
    incident happened with late night crews in the city centre. It 
    appears to be people leaving parties who have shouted at the 
    crews.
"There have been reports of other incidents in 
    outlying areas but no-one wants to make it into a big issue in case 
    it prompts copycats."
A council spokesman said the authority was also aware of reports 
    of crews being abused, with a further source claiming there had 
    been "isolated incidents".
A council source said: "The guys out on the 
    collections are fragile enough as things are."
Despite a lock down on information while the Police Scotland 
    investigation is ongoing, The Herald understands the vehicle had 
    passed an MOT just a couple of months before the crash.
It is also understood the driver, 57, would have been subjected 
    to health checks by his employer, the city council, since turning 
    55 and had been on a regular route.
One source has also claimed the vehicle was not equipped with 
    what is being described as a "dead man switch" but added 
    that this would only have applied to the crushing mechanisms at the 
    rear of the vehicle if installed.
Three members of the same family were among six of those killed 
    in the crash, in which the lorry careered around 300 yards through 
    the city centre three days before Christmas.
Jack Sweeney, 68, his 69-year-old wife Lorraine and their 
    18-year-old granddaughter Erin McQuade fell victim to the crash.
Gillian Ewing, 52, Stephenie Tait, 29, and 51-year-old 
    Jacqueline Morton also died. A further ten people were taken to 
    hospital after the crash.
A statement from NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde said: 
    "Three patients remain in two hospitals in Glasgow 
    following last Monday's tragic incident in George 
    Square.
"Two patients remain in Glasgow Royal Infirmary. A 
    14-year-old girl and a 64-year-old female both remain 
    stable.
"A 57-year-old man is being treated at the Western 
    Infirmary and is also in a stable condition."
Meanwhile, it is unlikely any of the memorial to the victims of 
    the crash which has materialised in Royal Exchange Square is likely 
    to be removed until after the funerals.
