Splits begin to show within Highland Council ruling administration 

Cracks are beginning to show within Highland Council 's ruling coalition with factions questioning the future of the alliance . 
Politicians in the SNP / Lib Dem / Labour pact are said to be wondering if they might be better affiliated with the Independents , whose leader Carlolyn Wilson claimed at least five SNP councillors supported the change . 
She said coalition members saw the No vote in the Scottish independence referendum as a turning point and change could be imminent . 
The coalition was formed following the 2012 local elections and controversially denied power to the Independent group , which gained the most seats . 
Predictions that it would quickly founder proved off the mark but there is a growing discontent , particularly among Lib Dems , about what they see as the SNP 's dictatorial style of leadership . 
These views were stifled by an unofficial pre-referendum truce , but now the gloves are off . 
" At this time we have not been approached by any of the groups within the council but we are aware that the referendum was a bit of a watershed , " said Councillor Wilson . 
" Everybody was working towards that and now they 're thinking about the future . 
" We as a group would be happy to speak to any of the other groups within the council to consider going forward . " 
Deputy leader David Alston did not rule out suggestions that his Lib Dem group could terminate the two-year-old pact and enter a power-sharing partnership with the Independents . 
" We are into major constitutional change and the overarching task is to secure the interests of the Highlands , " he said . 
" That must include things like reclaiming our right to make decisions about local taxation and reversing the centralisation that 's going on . We all need to take stock and ask who we can work with to drive this forward . 
" We will all need some thinking time to be clear how , as Highland Lib Dems , we can most effectively work with others who share these views . " 
His party colleagues Carolyn Caddick , Inverness South councillor and the local authority 's veterans spokesman , admitted she was uncomfortable remaining in the coalition . 
" I only stood for election because of my concern about the SNP juggernaut , " she said . " I do n't like the way they do business . Their priority is backing the Scottish Government . " 
Kate Stephen , Culloden and Ardersier Lib Dem councillor , contrasted the level of individual freedom enjoyed by her party 's members with the party loyalty of the SNP group . 
Ken Gowans , Inverness South SNP councillor , said it was reasonable to suggest all members would be taking stock of their position after the referendum . 
However , council leader Drew Hendry , who also heads the SNP group , was unaware of any potential splits in the coalition . 
" We have a very challenging job in terms of the budget and that 's what we 've been focused on , " he said . 
