Helicopter lands at Sumburgh Airport after alert

by ALISTAIR MUNRO
AN emergency was declared at Sumburgh Airport in 
    Shetland after a Super Puma helicopter was forced to divert 
    following an alert on board.
The Bristow-operated offshore helicopter, an Airbus EC225, 
    alerted the airport control tower at around 
    10.50am after a warning light was 
    triggered.
It landed safely at around 11am with all 18 passengers and two 
    crew reported as being safe and well.
The airport fire services, ambulance crews and police were all 
    scrambled, while the Sumburgh-based Coastguard rescue helicopter 
    was put on standby.
A Bristow spokesman said: “Bristow Helicopters Ltd can 
    confirm that one of its Airbus EC225 helicopters was diverted to 
    Sumburgh Airport today at approximately 10.50am after a caution 
    light illuminated in the cockpit.
“The aircraft was undertaking a routine crew change 
    flight to an offshore installation and had 18 passengers and two 
    crew on-board at the time.
“The aircraft landed safely at Sumburgh Airport at 
    approximately 11am and is currently undergoing a fault diagnosis to 
    establish the required maintenance actions.
“The landing itself was uneventful but Sumburgh Airport 
    mobilised the emergency services as a matter of 
    routine.”
He added: “Flight safety is Bristow’s first priority and 
    we will always investigate prior to further flight.
A spokesman for Highlands and Islands Airports, who operate 
    Sumburgh Airport, said: “There was an incident involving a 
    Bristow helicopter at Sumburgh Airport this morning.
“The aircraft landed safely and the incident was quickly 
    stood down. In line with standard procedures, HIAL’s airport fire 
    service were on standby but were not required.”
Last year, four offshore workers died when a Super Puma AS332 L2 
    helicopter, crashed in the sea just off the Sumburgh coast at 
    Garth’s Ness.
Sarah Darnley, 45, from Elgin, Duncan Munro, 46, from Bishop 
    Auckland, and George Allison, 57, from Winchester, all drown, while 
    Gary McCrossan, 59, from Inverness, suffered heart failure in the 
    August disaster.
In October 2012 all 19 people on board a Super Puma EC225 were 
    rescued safely after it put down in the sea off Shetland. The 
    incident was caused by a cracked shaft in the main gearbox.
In May 2012 all 14 people on board a Super Puma EC225 were 
    rescued when it came down about 30 miles off the coast of Aberdeen 
    during a flight to an oil rig.
In April 2009 all 14 passengers and two crew on board a Super 
    Puma AS332L2 lost their lives after it came down in the North Sea. 
    Eight of the victims came from the north east of Scotland, seven 
    from the rest of the UK, and one from Latvia.
And in February 2009 a Super Puma EC225 ditched in fog a short 
    distance from a BP oil platform in the ETAP field, 125 miles east 
    of Aberdeen. All 18 people on board survived. Crew error and a 
    faulty alert system were blamed.
