The Scottish hangman who carried out UK 's final execution 

Jock Stewart carried out executions right up to the day in 1964 when the trap-door opened for the final time . 
Jock Stewart carefully bound the wrists of the condemned man , noticing as he did so that one of his fingers had been heavily bandaged . 
He thought back to the previous afternoon . The man 's wife , coming to see him for the final time , had sat on one side of the thick pane of prison glass , her husband on the other . 
At some point , whether through fear , frustration or rage , the prisoner had suddenly erupted in a flash of violence and punched the glass hard , breaking his finger . 
Perhaps the bandaging seemed slightly redundant now , for the man – 21-year-old Peter Allen – was about to die . 
According to Jock he only uttered one word before being sent to his death . When he set eyes on the scaffold – the noose tied , ready for its grim purpose – he cried out : " Jesus ! " Then he was silent . 
To minimise stress for the condemned Jock aimed to have them from cell to the last drop within a minute . 
He swiftly placed the loop around Allen 's neck , checked all was correct then stepped back and released the mechanism , dropping Allen 5 ft 6 in to his death . 
It was 8 am on the morning of August 13 , 1964 – the date of the last ever executions in the UK . 
Allen was hung at Liverpool 's Walton Prison at the same moment as Gwynne Evans – his accomplice in the murder of John Alan West on April 7 that year – was executed at Manchester 's Strangeways Prison . 
The executioner at Manchester that day was Englishman Harry Allen . His counterpart in Liverpool was Robert Leslie ' Jock ' Stewart , the only Scot to hold the post of Chief Executioner in modern times and , along with Harry Allen , Britain 's last hangman . 
Jock Stewart 's road to the gallows started early in life . Born in Edinburgh in 1918 , he was brought up not far from Saughton Prison . 
In 1928 the stairheads and closes of the capital were abuzz with chatter about a sensational murder case . 
Unemployed labourer Alan Wales had cut the throat of his wife Isabella with a cobbler 's knife after she left him and went back to her mother 's . 
He was found guilty and sentenced to death . The execution was to take place at Saughton . 
Young Jock , just 10 years old , was gripped by the whispered conversations he overheard as the grown-ups discussed the details of the case . 
The gruesome affair clearly captured the lad 's imagination . When his teacher asked the class what they wanted to do when they grew up he replied : " I want to be a hangman " . 
And true to his ambition that 's exactly what he did – spurred on by a chance connection years later with one of the most famous executioners of the 20th Century . 
After the Second World War Jock settled in new wife Marie 's hometown of Oldham . She worked in a pub owned by Albert Pierrepoint , who executed at least 400 people in his career . 
His father Henry was also a hangman and his uncle Thomas had carried out the execution of Alan Wales at Saughton . It seemed life was coming full circle . 
The Stewarts became close friends with Albert Pierrepoint , a relationship that must have inspired him to continue on the path he 'd set out on in 1928 . 
In December 1950 he applied to the Prison Commission to become an official executioner . He was accepted for training , which lasted 14 days and included medical and psychiatric tests and a written exam . 
He then had to witness his first execution – the hanging of Nicholas Crosby by Albert Pierrepoint – to make sure he had the constitution to allow him to take up the role . Jock passed with flying colours . He was a hangman . 
Writer Steve Fielding , author of The Executioner 's Bible ( John Blake Publishing , price £ 7.99 ) , has researched the life and career of Jock Stewart . 
He explains what happened next : " Jock started , as all executioners did , as assistant hangman . His first job was in on July 19 , 1951 , and after that he carried out executions all over England . 
" He had eight in 1952 and his only female hanging , that of Louisa Merrifield for poisoning , in 1953 . But in 1956 Albert Pierrepoint resigned leaving a vacancy as a chief executioner . Jock applied and was promoted . 
" The pay for an executioner had been very good in the past . It was a way for people to travel and earn a living – as much as a fortnight 's pay for one execution . 
" But come Jock 's time pay had n't risen in line with inflation – it was around 10 guineas a job , roughly £ 200 in today 's money . That meant executioners had to have another job – everything from publicans like Albert Pierrepoint to hairdressers . 
" Jock was a metalworker when he was n't a hangman . " 
Aside from a short period in the mid-1950s , Jock carried out executions right up to the day in 1964 when the trap-door opened for the final time 
His jobs included one at Pentonville where he was to hang a teddy boy . In a pathetic scene the young man , almost trying to be helpful , put the noose over his own neck , but Jock had to gently tell him he 'd put it on wrong and arrange it correctly before pulling the lever . 
This gentle side of Jock 's character is one Steve can shed light on . 
" I 've spoken to a couple of people who worked with Jock and they both said he was a lovely bloke . Kind and gentle , with a nice temperament . 
" People might think you 'd have to be cold-blooded , but Jock was anything but . " 
That image is reflected in the memories of his family . His wife and four daughters knew him as a perfect husband and devoted dad . Until they were grown up his girls had no idea why he 'd have to take " a couple of days off " from his job sometimes . 
Jock remained on the executioners ' list for a time after the hanging of Peter Allen , but long before the death penalty was permanently abolished in December 1969 he emigrated to South Africa to become an aircraft engineer . 
In 1988 , aged 70 , he found a lump on his neck and was sent for a biopsy . Two days after returning from hospital he passed away in bed while lifting his daughter Linda 's hand to his lips to kiss it . 
His death marked the end of an era . The last Scottish executioner – a gentle , quiet man who carried out a role that has continues to divide opinion to this day – was gone . 
And with him went this country 's last connection to the hangman 's noose . 
After his death in 1988 a cutting from a book of poems was found among Jock 's belongings . The words to the verse , called Myself , may not have been written by Jock , but they are perhaps an insight into how he viewed his life , his work and himself . 
I have to live with myself , and so , 
I want to be fit for myself to know ; 
I want to be able as days go by , 
Always to look myself straight in the eye ; 
I do n't want to stand with the setting sun , 
And hate myself for the things I 've done . 
I want to go out with my head erect , 
I want to deserve all men 's respect ; 
But here in the struggle for fame and self , 
I want to be able to like myself ; 
I do n't want to look at myself and know , 
That I 'm bluster and bluff and empty show . 
I never can hide myself from me , 
I see what others may never see ; 
I know what others may never know , 
I never can fool myself , and so , 
Whatever happens , I want to be , 
Self-respecting and conscience-free . 
