Scottish landowners express fears on right-to-buy 

by TOM PETERKIN 
ALMOST half of Scotland 's landowners see the Scottish Government 's land reform plans and political uncertainty as the main threat to their businesses . 
A study of estate owners and managers found that 47 per cent were worried about plans to redistribute land ownership and Scottish independence . 
The finding was included in an independent study that found members of the body representing landowners , Scottish Land & Estates ( SLE ) , contribute £ 471 million to Scotland 's output . 
An estimated 8,114 full-time jobs are linked to SLE membership , which accounts for 65 per cent of all Scotland 's private estates . 
The Scottish Government is currently overseeing a land reform review , which is examining the possibility of extending the right to buy out landlords . 
An agricultural holdings review is also looking at giving an absolute right-to-buy to tenant farmers whether the landowner is willing to sell or not . 
The study was undertaken by the independent rural advisory company Rural Solutions and Scotland 's Rural College . 
The paper said : " The topic that came up most often was land reform and the proposals around absolute right-to-buy . It is no surprise to find that this subject was causing concern and uncertainty . The subject of land reform also came up regularly in the interviews even though there was no line of inquiry specifically designed to introduce the subject . " 
Published at SLE 's annual conference in Edinburgh , the study found that estates were involved in 20 business sectors , including housing provision , tourism , energy , agriculture , forestry , country sports and conservation . 
Luke Borwick , SLE chairman , said : " This study clearly demonstrates the very substantial contribution made by estates . They are part of the fabric of rural Scotland and estate owners want to play their part in ensuring rural Scotland is a thriving and vibrant place to live and work . " 
He added : " We hope this study will show that landowners are part of the solution rather than the problem . The study brings much needed hard evidence to a debate about land ownership that is frequently not evidence-based . " 
The study was based on the activities of 277 estates , ranging in size from 100 hectares to 20,000 hectares . 
Community Land Scotland , the organisation representing community landowners , argued that the report underlined the need for land reform . 
It said : " It is particularly striking to see ownership in so few hands and those same hands for sometimes centuries . It demonstrates just what a monopoly a few people have over land in Scotland . 
" Worryingly , the report also reveals that the concentration in direct control of land is set to continue . 
" When you ally that to the vast sums of public money flowing into these estates , it shows how Scotland 's land ownership patterns also concentrate wealth and privilege . 
" As it stands , the report is an eloquent statement of the need for more land reform . " 
