Gael force: moved off main stage by 100mph wind, Waterboys 
    go down pub for impromptu gig
THE Waterboys played an impromptu gig at a pub after 
    their Stirling Castle Hogmanay headline concert was 
    cancelled.

Footage of the set at No 2 Baker Street in Stirling was put on 
    YouTube after the main event on Stirling Castle esplanade at which 
    they were due to headline was axed earlier in the evening.

Organisers said refunds would be honoured after the plug was 
    pulled on the event due to 100mph winds.
Stirling Council said the decision to cancel the concert was 
    taken on public safety grounds following an emergency meeting at 
    8.30pm.
Fans took to social media to thank the band in the morning.
Waterboys drummer Ralph Salmins tweeted a picture of the gig in 
    front of delighted revellers: "Here we are slamming 
    down a quick set in a pub to make up for last night's 
    cancelled gig...what a night."
The concert site was hit by "exceptionally high and 
    unforecast gusts of wind which were causing structural damage to 
    the stage and blowing over portaloos, fencing and other 
    equipment".
A spokesman for Stirling Council said: "The safety 
    of our audience, the crew and the performers is paramount and could 
    not be guaranteed with the exceptionally strong gusts of 
    wind.
"Ticket holders will be fully 
    refunded."
Stirling Policing Commander Chief Inspector Paul Rollo said: 
    "Hogmanay is one of the highlights of the year in the 
    city, and the joint decision to cancel the street party was only 
    taken after lengthy discussion and deliberation with the 
    organisers."
A spokesman for event organiser Zisys Events said: 
    ''We deeply regret the necessary cancellation of 
    Stirling's Hogmanay Event.
''The Esplanade, while a totally stunning 
    venue, is on a very high and open site and is exposed to extremes 
    of weather.
''Gusts of over 100mph were recorded, which 
    exceeded the safe limits for the stage.
''Other facilities on the site, such as signage 
    and portaloos, were also adversely affected by the high 
    winds.
''The site became unsafe for the public and the 
    decision was made to cancel the event before the gates officially 
    opened.''
''We sincerely apologise for any disappointment 
    and inconvenience caused.''
