Brad and Angelina fooled the world 

" I love that they managed to sneak away and get wed and the world did n't know about it for a whole five days . " 
So Brad and Angelina have finally tied the knot ! 
Over the past few years , we 've read countless times they were getting married " this weekend " . 
I love that they managed to sneak away and get wed and the world did n't know about it for a whole five days . 
It just makes you realise that no matter how famous you are , you can lead a private life . They 're bound to be feeling just a wee bit smug and quite right too . 
Let 's not forget that Brangelina have " form " here . Angelina had a double mastectomy and we knew nothing about it until she wanted us to know . It makes me chuckle that more minor celebs complain they get ambushed by the paparazzi and ca n't lead a normal life . Here we have two of the biggest stars in the world and they manage the media on their own terms . You 've got to take your hat off to them . 
There was n't a peep about the marriage in LA before they tied the knot . It 's so ironic , given we 've read reports of their impending nuptials so many times and they 've turned out to be pure fiction . 
I 've interviewed both Brad and Angie and , though it sometimes does n't come across , they 've both got a good sense of humour . Once on the red carpet everyone was screaming for Angelina to come over and I shouted : " Adopt me , Angelina " . Well , she only came over , laughing her head off . Result ! 
Brad does n't mind taking the mickey out of himself , either . He once said at a press conference he knew half the reporters there had n't seen his new film , Tree of Life . 
Well , not to worry – neither had he , but he 'd heard he was really good in it ! 
Brad and Angelina have done everything in their powers to be " normal " . That 's why they 're so private . They are n't , of course . They can strive for it and be as down to earth as possible . But at the end of the day , movie stars are different . It 's as simple as that ! 
Their six children are bound to be delighted that mum and dad have got hitched . In fact , Brad admitted not so long ago the kids had been nagging them to get on with it . It seems pester power might have been a factor in this particular marriage ! 
You know what 's bound to be coming next . Within a couple of months , you 'll start to hear " marriage in trouble " rumours . That 's just the way it works in this town , I 'm afraid . 
It 's the price you pay for being a world-famous movie star . Is it a price worth paying ? 
Well , all I 'm going to say is you do n't get many movie stars quitting and moving back to Obscurity-ville once you 've reached the top , do you ? 
You never know what goes on behind closed doors , of course . 
There 's still a storm of speculation surrounding Beyonce and Jay Z possibly splitting up , even though he appeared on stage with their daughter Ivy Blue when she sang at Sunday night 's MTV Video Music Awards . 
Beyonce 's dad Mathew has now come out and said they played up to the divorce rumours to hype ticket sales . Would they really be that cynical ? Who knows ? 
But while once couples used to stay together for the kids , now they often stay together for the " brand " . And they do n't come any bigger than Beyonce and Jay Z . Well , maybe Brad and Angelina . 
The last date of Beyonce and Jay Z 's tour is in Paris – city of lurve – in September . Will we hear some sort of announcement after that ? 
It would n't totally surprise me , put it that way . But , as I say , we never truly know what goes on behind closed doors . 
Well , unless they 're lift doors , that is , and Jay Z , Beyonce and her sister Solange are in the elevator ! 
