Intelligence club 'could snub Yes vote 
    Scotland'
THE UK would be more willing to share intelligence 
    with New Zealand than with an independent Scotland, according to a 
    Home Office report.

The report on security, the seventh in the UK Government's 
    Scotland Analysis series, looks at policing and intelligence in the 
    event of Scotland becoming independent and its theme is an echo of 
    the No campaign slogan - "safer 
    together".
It concludes that threats to Scotland from organised crime 
    gangs, cyber criminals and global terrorism "are best 
    confronted with Scotland inside the UK".
Home Secretary Theresa May launched the paper in Edinburgh with 
    the warning the UK's current intelligence and security network 
    would be difficult to replicate in an independent Scotland.
Her arguments were dismissed by the SNP, which said Scotland was 
    already an independent jurisdiction for policing and already has 
    cross-border cooperation on counter-terrorism and other issues.
Ms May rejected nationalist ­arguments that Scotland may face a 
    diminished threat by rejecting nuclear weapons and shunning 
    "illegal wars" such as the Iraq conflict. She said some 
    terrorists have an issue with the way of life in the West rather 
    than specific grievances about foreign policy.
She said: "I don't think it is possible to 
    guarantee the threat would diminish."
She struck a more conciliatory tone than Defence Secretary 
    Philip Hammond on a similar recent mission over the Border, but the 
    report stated: "Of note among the UK's 
    international relationships is the one it shares with Australia, 
    Canada, New Zealand and the USA, also known as 
    Five-Eyes.
"There would be no automatic right of entry to the 
    Five-Eyes community for an independent Scottish state. The 
    intelligence these countries choose to collect and share is based 
    on whether it is in their national interest to do so.
"Entry is by invitation only. No new country has 
    been admitted for decades. There would have to be a benefit to the 
    other members of an independent nation joining - its unique 
    contribution. An independent Scottish state may not possess the 
    capabilities for this, and any new capabilities would take time to 
    mature."
The same countries operate a police intelligence sharing group 
    called the Strategic Alliance Group.
It was put to Ms May it was odd London might be prepared to 
    share police and security intelligence with a nation of five 
    million people at the other end of the globe, but not with a nation 
    of five million people in the same island.
She said: "I would expect that ... the UK would look 
    to co-operate with it but there are particular arrangements for 
    working together and sharing data and membership of these groups 
    would not be automatic."
Former Home Secretary Lord Reid, a Scottish Labour politician, 
    said: "A separate Scotland would be less secure than at 
    present and less well-placed to counter many security 
    threats.
SNP Justice convener Christine Grahame said: "This 
    is Project Fear at its worst. Trying to politicise issues of 
    security and anti-terrorism in this way is the height of 
    irresponsibility. This paper ignores the fact Scotland is already 
    an independent jurisdiction for justice and policing, and as such 
    we already have lots of cross-border cooperation on 
    counter-terrorism and other issues which will continue in an 
    independent Scotland.
"It beggars belief Theresa May feels able to lecture 
    anyone on arresting people in other countries after she was forced 
    into an embarrassing U-turn on the European Arrest 
    Warrant."
Justice Secretary Kenny MacAskill said: "An 
    independent Scotland will have first rate security arrangements to 
    counter any threats we may face. We will continue to work in close 
    collaboration with the rest of the UK and international partners on 
    security and intelligence matters, which is in everyone's 
    interests."
