NHS out of hours service to be tested in North 
    Harris
A new out-of-hours service, involving specialist 
    unscheduled care nurses as the first point of contact for patients, 
    is set to be piloted in North Harris from October 1, 
    2014.
Over a number of months, NHS Western Isles has been working with 
    local clinicians to consider the potential options for providing 
    safe, appropriate and sustainable medical cover for the patients of 
    North Harris Medical Practice during the periods when the Practice 
    is closed.
This has been a necessary step, as the GPs in North Harris have 
    confirmed that they will no longer be available to cover the 
    out-of-hours service for the patients of North Harris Practice 
    after December 2014. All GPs have the choice of ‘opting out’ of 
    providing out-of-hours services.
Under new proposals, to be tested for a period of three months 
    from October 1, Community Unscheduled Care Nurses (nurses with 
    additional specialist training) will be the first point of contact 
    for patients who need a visit at their place of residence. This is 
    the same model that serves patients across the length and breadth 
    of Lewis. (GPs in North Harris will continue to be available for 
    home visits for the first two-week introductory period of the 
    pilot.)
For the remainder of the pilot, the out-of-hours service for 
    North Harris Medical Practice patients will be covered by Community 
    Unscheduled Care Nurses and GPs based in the out-of-hours centre in 
    Western Isles Hospital in Stornoway.
If, for any reason, a patient requires the presence of a doctor, 
    then there will also be a doctor available to visit the patient at 
    home. All mobile patients will however be asked to attend the 
    dedicated out-of-hours facility in Stornoway, as is the case for 
    all Lewis patients.
GPs in North Harris Medical Practice will continue to provide 
    services to patients during the day, and arrangements for emergency 
    services with the Scottish Ambulance Service remain unchanged.
NHS Western Isles Medical Director, Dr Angus McKellar explained: 
    “There are significant issues in terms of recruitment and 
    retention of medical staff in all remote and rural areas of 
    Scotland, and there are increasing numbers of GPs opting out of 
    providing out-of-hours cover. This means that we need to consider 
    less traditional models of care, as is the case with many other 
    areas of Scotland. This is the reason for looking at advanced 
    nursing roles and strengthening partnerships with Scottish 
    Ambulance Service staff.
“Under the new arrangements, as is the case presently, 
    patients should call NHS24 on 111 in non-emergency situations. The 
    call will be directed to a GP based in Stornoway, who will decide 
    whether the patient needs to be seen by a GP or a specialist 
    Community Unscheduled Care Nurse. The patient will then either be 
    asked to attend the out-of-hours centre in Western Isles Hospital, 
    or they will receive a visit from a nurse or a GP.”
He added: “Our Community Unscheduled Care Nurses are 
    highly trained health professionals with a wealth of experience. 
    The nurses are enthusiastic about providing this service in Harris 
    and I firmly believe that the patients of North Harris Medical 
    Practice will be delighted with the new arrangements, once they 
    have had first-hand experience of the excellent services that these 
    nurses deliver. I consider that this new service has the potential 
    to strengthen and enhance the services provided to Harris patients. 
    In particular, it will enable the delivery of enhanced healthcare 
    provision to patients within their own homes (that would only 
    previously have been available to hospital inpatients) including, 
    for example, the use of IV antibiotics.”
The new service model will be continually assessed during the 
    pilot period and all patients who use the service will be asked for 
    their feedback, so that arrangements can be effectively evaluated 
    after the three-month pilot.
A further public meeting will be arranged in January to allow 
    the sharing of collated patient feedback and to present the results 
    of the evaluation process.
