Offshore wind farm setback as substation plan 
    refused
PLANS for an offshore wind farm, which has outraged US 
    billionaire Donald Trump, have suffered a major setback after 
    permission for an electricity substation integral to the 
    development was refused by councillors. 
The substation was planned for the community of Blackdog where 
    there was stiff local resistance. The Formartine area committee of 
    Aberdeenshire Council yesterday refused the proposal. 
The tycoon immediately showed his delight on Twitter, saying: 
    "Alex Salmond suffered a huge defeat by the people of 
    Blackdog. Communities all over Scotland are fighting this loser. 
    Alex Salmond of Scotland may be the dumbest leader of the free 
    world. I can't imagine that anyone wants him in 
    office."
The Scottish Government had approved the 11-turbine European 
    Offshore Wind Deployment Centre (EOWDC) in March. It would not be a 
    commercial wind farm but a testing centre for offshore 
    developers.
The Trump Organisation is convinced it will blight its nearby 
    £750 million golf development at Balmedie and is challenging the 
    Scottish Government's decision in court.
But now the developers have to work out the implications of the 
    council committee's decision to refuse the substation at 
    Blackdog. Some 62 out of 85 local residents objected. 
Iain Todd, spokesman for the EOWDC project partners, said: 
    "We are extremely disappointed at the decision. 
    
"We believe this a missed opportunity for the region 
    and that we could have worked with Aberdeenshire Council to agree 
    further conditions to progress the scheme. 
"We will give careful consideration to the formal 
    reasons for the decision before we decide our next 
    steps." 
The Trump Organisation's petition for a judicial review of 
    the EOWDC is due to be heard at the Court of Session in a 
    fortnight. 
The petition was lodged by Trump International Golf Links and 
    The Trump Organisation.
