MSPs grill boss behind capital project targets
THE head of a flagship Scottish government body 
    charged with commissioning schools, hospitals and roads has faced 
    criticism from MSPs for repeatedly getting his targets 
    wrong.

Barry White, chief executive of the Scottish Futures Trust 
    (SFT), claimed the body had saved the taxpayer more than £132 
    million, and, he said, although some projects had been delayed this 
    was often because further savings were being made.
The trust was set up by the SNP Government in 2008 to find an 
    alternative to the widely discredited public finance initiatives 
    (PFI) and its successor public-private partnerships. These schemes 
    had proved poor value for the public purse in paying for new 
    capital projects.
Although the trust made significant savings (which were 
    externally validated), its alternative to PFI, the Non-Profit 
    Distributing model (NPD) has been criticised for delays in 
    delivering supposedly "shovel-ready" projects.
Finance Committee convener Kenneth Gibson asked Mr White: 
    "Are you not concerned this achievement has been 
    overshadowed? Have you been over-ambitious and left yourself open 
    to some of this criticism?"
Mr Gibson said there had been a "consistent 
    overestimation of projects" and that every year there was 
    "a huge imbalance between what is projected and what is 
    achieved".
Mr White insisted that although there had been delays, NPD would 
    see a "pipeline of investments" with a 
    combined value of £808m, and due to start construction in 2014-15, 
    which would bring benefits for many years to come.
He gave as an example of a worthwhile delay a planned secondary 
    school which was held up because the local authority had decided to 
    build a primary school on the same site using shared sports and 
    dining facilities. This, he said, would provide greater value for 
    money.
The Conservatives were scathing about the SFT's 
    ­performance prior to Mr White's appearance. They pointed out 
    that of proposals worth around £2.5 
    billion - including the Sick Children's hospital in Edinburgh 
    and road improvements such as the M8 completion and the Aberdeen 
    peripheral route - work had so far begun on only £270m worth of 
    projects.
Labour MSP Michael MacMahon put it to Mr White that many 
    projects dated back to announcements in 2006 by the former 
    Labour-LibDem coalition.
Mr White also blamed delays on a cut in capital spending, which 
    the current Scottish Government had sought to address with 
    transfers from revenue spending.
l Ministers opened two new 
    secondary schools yesterday. The Lasswade Centre in Midlothian and 
    Eastwood High School in East Renfrewshire were built in partnership 
    between the two local councils, helping to save an estimated 
    £4m.
First Minister Alex Salmond opened the 
    £36.8m Lasswade development which 
    includes a swimming pool, library and other facilities for the 
    general public.
"Lasswade High pupils are developing their skills 
    and talents in a wonderful environment, including bright, airy 
    classrooms and social spaces, and with excellent, fully equipped 
    sports facilities," he said.
Education Minister Alasdair Allan opened the £29 million 
    Eastwood School in Newton Mearns, which also has wider community 
    facilities. "The new sports centre and two all-weather 
    pitches will benefit not just the pupils, but the entire 
    community," he said.
The £1.25bn Schools for the Future 
    programme will lead to the construction of 67 schools across 
    Scotland.
