Pregnancy test kits plan for pubs in Scotland
pregnancy testing 
    kits may be made available in pubs as part of a drive to stop 
    expectant mothers in Scotland from drinking alcohol.
The Scottish Government has launched a two-pronged approach to 
    tackle growing concern about Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder (FASD) 
    - a condition caused by exposure to alcohol in the womb which can 
    lead to serious learning and behavioural problems.
An information pack has been circulated to all Scottish health 
    boards urging them to spread the message that women should stop 
    drinking alcohol completely when pregnant to avoid putting their 
    baby at risk.
A training programme has also been created to help NHS staff 
    spot symptoms of FASD amid concern many children suffer it but 
    remain undiagnosed.
Further measures are also being looked at to spread the message 
    that during pregnancy no alcohol equals no risk. These include 
    adopting a Canadian scheme where pregnancy testing kit dispensers 
    displaying the message "Think before you 
    drink" have been placed inside the ladies' 
    toilets in bars.
It is estimated that 10,000 children in Scotland are currently 
    affected by FASD.
Dr Maggie Watts, FASD co-ordinator for Scotland, said in the 
    early weeks before a mother may even realise she is pregnant 
    alcohol can affect her baby's development. Facial deformities 
    caused by exposure to the toxins, including wide spacing between 
    the eyes and a thin upper lip, are associated with this time.
However, Dr Watts continued: "The baby's brain 
    is developing throughout pregnancy. Alcohol disrupts pathways so 
    when brain cells are migrating to where they need to be they are 
    not making the linkages or they are making the wrong 
    linkages.
"If you do brain scans of people with FASD you find 
    they fire off all different parts of the brain rather than the part 
    of the brain you or I would fire off."
This can lead to a range of ­problems, including difficulty 
    following instructions, connecting causes and effects and building 
    relationships.
Dr Watts said: "Although their IQ may be normal 
    their emotional intelligence is not anything like as high. You have 
    a child of 18, who talks very well with good expressive language 
    but whose social skills are the equivalent of a 
    six-year-old."
Some studies have shown light drinking - one 175ml glass of wine 
    a week - during pregnancy does not harm the fetus. However, in 2007 
    Department of Health guidance was changed from ­limiting 
    consumption to one to two units of alcohol weekly to abstinence.
Dr Watts said: "We just don't know the risks... 
    But we do know that your baby could come to fetal alcohol harm, so 
    for safety keep your baby safe and do not drink."
Caroline Hutchens, from Glasgow, guessed her adopted son Logan 
    may be suffering from FASD when he was still a baby - even though 
    alcohol was not the reason he had been placed in her care.
She said: "Having bubbles in his bath, brushing his 
    teeth, going to a birthday party or the theatre or the cinema - 
    things that most children love - can cause him distress.
"I feel hugely sad that alcohol has had this affect 
    on his life."
Eileen Calder, director of the support organisation FASD 
    ­Scotland, said this year an FASD awareness day was run to coincide 
    with university freshers' week.She said: "We found 
    only a few women who knew of the risks of alcohol exposure to their 
    baby while pregnant."
