£100 million distillery gets go-ahead

A £100 million distillery on Speyside has today (Tuesday) been 
    given the green light.
The Edrington Group’s new distillery and visitor centre at the 
    Macallan was unanimously approved during a meeting of Moray's 
    planning and regulatory services committee.
Work is expected to get underway in the autumn and is due for 
    completion by the spring of 2017.
Famed architects Rogers Stirk Harbour and Partners have designed 
    the new distillery, which will enable Macallan to double production 
    as demand soars. A visitors’ exhibition, gallery, café, and shop 
    are included in the plans.
Graham Hutcheon, group operations director, said: 
    "We are delighted with the decision taken today by The 
    Moray Council planning committee. This permission enables us to 
    forge ahead with our work on site."
Robertson have been chosen as preferred contractors for the new 
    development, it was also announced, while Forsyths of Rothes have 
    been named as supplier of the distillation equipment.
Mr Hutcheon continued: "Only the external appearance 
    of the distillery will change, the exceptional quality of The 
    Macallan, which has been produced for many years using copper 
    stills from Forsyths, will not be compromised and the same focus on 
    attention to detail and personal care of the whisky’s production 
    will be upheld. The new distillery will undoubtedly become one of 
    the most talked about distilleries, not only in Speyside but 
    globally, and we look forward to starting on site 
    soon."
Following an earlier decision for the Moray Economic Partnership 
    to lead the campaign for Moray to secure the UK’s first spaceport, 
    Councillor John Cowe said it was a "good day" for 
    Moray.
"They may be able to serve Macallan from the new 
    distillery on that first flight into space in a few years 
    time," Councillor Douglas Ross, committee chair, 
    said.
For more on both developments, read this week’s ‘Scot’.
