Scottish health chief is walking his way to a slimmer future 
NHS boss has lost over 6 stone . 
NHS Scotland chief executive Paul Gray is battling the bulge by walking more than 10,000 steps a day – the equivalent of about four miles . 
He measures his progress with a pedometer – which counts the number of steps he takes – and has revealed he 's used it so much the batteries ran flat . The 52-year-old has also cut fatty food out of his diet . 
As leader of the NHS in Scotland – where more than two million people are overweight or obese – Paul told The Sunday Post he realised he needed to set a good example . Since taking up his high-profile job in December 2013 , he 's tried to make changes to his daily life . 
Instead of taking lifts , he will walk up stairs to burn extra calories and often pops out of his base at St Andrew 's House in Edinburgh for a lunchtime walk to get a bit of extra exercise . 
The end result is that he 's lost more than six stone . 
Paul , who has been overweight for the last 20 years , acknowledges his weight loss has n't gone as fast as he 'd like , but said the important point , for him and others trying to lose weight , is to keep going in the right direction . 
He said : " When I took this job I was clear that I had already begun a trajectory of losing weight and I was clear I should continue on that . I concluded it was important to take more care of my health . 
" This is a journey and I know I need to keep on it . I lost more than four stone up to November and I 've continued that downward trajectory , although it would be fair to say it has been slow progress . " 
The dad-of-three declined to say what his current weight is and said he has n't set a final target or a deadline . But he is clear about his commitment to walking – a cheap and easy exercise he said many people can benefit from . 
" I 've been trying to do 10,000 steps a day , " he said , before adding : " I was going to show you my pedometer but I 've used it that much the battery has gone flat . " 
Last week , we revealed hundreds of people in Britain were claiming benefits because they were too fat to work . And while that situation comes at a price , the cost of obesity to the nation 's health service is far greater . 
Paul 's own annual report last year pointed out physical inactivity resulted in around 2,500 premature deaths in Scotland each year and costs NHS Scotland around £ 94.1 million a year . 
A staggering 63 % of adults between 16 and 64 ( 2,181,693 ) are classed as overweight or obese in Scotland , with 29 % of children aged two to 15 also classed as overweight . 
However , Paul said the country had made " significant progress " tackling coronary heart disease and strokes . He said the important thing for people looking to lose weight was that they moderate what they eat and eat " sensibly and healthily " . And while he acknowledged health staff should set an example , he said he was sympathetic to people trying to lose weight . 
He also said he would not want to make overweight members of NHS staff feel they were less valued because of their health and fitness . And while weight is a personal thing for everyone , Paul said it was important that people discussed it . 
He added : " If people feel they need help then they should be encouraged . It 's important people can talk about it . " 
Fitness expert Yvonne Wake of the University of Roehampton last night praised the exec for taking the initiative . She said simple changes to peoples ' everyday lifestyles can have a huge effect . 
She said : " What he 's doing is a really good approach to take . If he walks for an hour every day he 'll really start to notice a difference . It sounds like he 's doing it the right way . " 

