Fire safety fears raised over sprinkler-free hospital wards 

Health bosses have been accused of putting patients ' lives in danger by failing to install sprinkler systems in hospitals . 
The Sunday Post can reveal only a handful of wards across the country use the life-saving devices , despite more than 520 fire incidents within buildings in just five years . 
Among the emergencies dealt with were electrical faults , cigarette fires , cooker blazes and even patients who had set bed sheets or mattresses alight . 
Current legislation dictates that sprinklers must be fitted in all care homes and sheltered housing , but it is yet to be extended to cover new-build hospitals and schools . 
Senior firefighters are calling for a change in the law that would see them given responsibility for ensuring the safety measure is installed on wards . 
It comes just weeks after The Sunday Post revealed hundreds of historic buildings crammed with precious art and antiques are at risk of being destroyed due to a lack of sprinklers . 
Scottish secretary of the Fire Brigades Union John Duffy said : " Part of the problem is that we have different bodies dealing with hospital buildings , from local authority planners and contractors to the health boards themselves . 
" Yet , as a result of UK Government deregulation , the opinion of the fire service is no longer taken into account . This has to change and we must be given a greater role in working with the likes of hospitals to assess safety . 
" The fact is that sprinklers are the best way to reduce fire damage . " 
Documents obtained under freedom of information show six of Scotland 's 16 health board areas – Borders , Dumfries and Galloway , Greater Glasgow , Orkney , Shetland and the Western Isles – have no sprinklers installed in any of their hospitals . 
Instead , the buildings rely on a mixture of extinguishers , fire blankets , gas suppression systems , protective doors and heat and smoke alarms . 
In the remaining 10 NHS boards , sprinklers are used in only a few wards and departments or in smaller hospitals housing elderly patients . 
The laundry block , nurses changing area and loading bay are protected by sprinklers at Ninewells in Dundee , as is the lower ground floor in Whitehills community hospital in Forfar . 
In Fife , all areas of the 60-bed Glenrothes Hospital are covered by the automatic system , but only small parts of the relatively new Victoria Hospital in Kirkcaldy have sprinklers in place . 
Only the atriums of Monklands and Wishaw hospitals in Lanarkshire have sprinklers , while NHS Forth Valley opted against installing them when building the £ 300 million state-of-the-art hospital in Larbert , which opened in 2010 . 
Seven wards at the 450-patient Raigmore Hospital in Inverness have sprinklers , but officials say the system will be extended to all areas as part of a three-year project . 
The Scottish Patients Association yesterday said it was " concerned " at the lack of automated sprinklers protecting wards across the country . 
Chairwoman Margaret Watt said : " This is a big problem and in many ways it is negligence from the NHS . " 
Officials at NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde said sprinklers are not compulsory for hospitals but said new facilities would contain the fire-fighting measure . 
NHS Forth Valley said it had considered all fire safety options when building its new hospital in Larbert , but decided there were " more appropriate solutions than sprinklers " . 
520 fire incidents in five-year period 
A patient who set his beard ablaze was among more than 520 fire incidents recorded in Scottish hospitals over the past five years . 
Documents released under Freedom of Information show electrical faults , burning food , cigarettes , and bin fires were the most common cause of the emergencies . 
However , dozens of incidents were also recorded of patients deliberately setting fire to bedding or their own clothes during stays on the ward . 
NHS Lothian witnessed the most fires with more than 110 incidents – the majority of them in bins or started on purpose – followed by NHS Highland with 99 and Tayside with 73 . 
At Ailsa Hospital , in Ayr , a man accidentally set fire to his beard while lighting a cigarette at a smoking shelter in May 2014 . Two years earlier at the same hospital staff had to dampen flames with a towel after a frying pan caught fire . 
One of the most serious incidents was in July 2012 at Monklands Hospital , in Airdrie , after an unattended blow torch ignited lining and debris on a toilet floor during upgrading works . 
The blaze caused damage to the toilet as well as the ward corridor and adjacent bedrooms . 
