Concern over brakes puts bus firm out of business

by ALISTAIR MUNRO
ABERDEENSHIRE bus firm Philips Coaches (Alford) was 
    today put out of business indefinitely by Traffic Commissioner for 
    Scotland Joan Aitken, who expressed “deep concern” about brake 
    faults on its school bus fleet.
Ms Aitken announced she could no longer trust company director 
    Richard Philip and said she does not want him back operating 
    buses.
She said both the UK Government’s Driver and Vehicle Standards 
    Agency (DVSA) and Aberdeenshire Council had found the five-vehicle 
    firm had failed to meet vehicle and driver safety standards.
The local authority terminated its 18 school bus contracts and 
    one local service with the operator in January, following a series 
    of incidents including brake defects and an unlicensed vehicle.
The DVSA banned three of the firm’s buses from the roads, one 
    with brake defects.
Ms Aitken said: “Mr Philip and his company have fallen 
    below the standards required of a public service vehicle 
    operator.
“I can repose no trust in Mr Philip. It is proportionate 
    and appropriate that I put this operator out of business and that I 
    make a finding of loss of repute.
“He is not someone who can be trusted any longer with 
    operating. I will make the disqualification an indefinite 
    one.
“I was deeply concerned by the evidence brought to me by 
    Aberdeenshire Council. The council and its public transport team 
    work very hard to secure safe transportation for the 
    children.
“It appears that Mr Philip simply cannot achieve the 
    standards required and any undertakings and assurances cannot be 
    trusted.”
Miss Aitken also warned Mr Philip and any associates not to 
    attempt to get back into operator licensing through another 
    business name or entity, as some other disqualified operators had 
    done.
The Philips Coaches website, which also refers to itself as 
    Philip’s Coaches, describes the firm as “one of 
    Aberdeenshire’s most prestigious taxi and coach hire 
    company”.
It stated: “Over the years we have earned an enviable 
    reputation and all of our vehicles are first class and driven by 
    friendly and helpful, fully qualified drivers, so you can rest 
    assured that you are in capable hands when you come to 
    us.”
