Grandmother gets 30-year bowling ban after slap 

by TAMSIN TYESON 
A GRANDMOTHER who umpired at the Commonwealth Games in Glasgow has been banned from her bowling club for 30 years . 
Kathleen Wright from Broughty Ferry has been told to stay away from Craigie Bowling Club in Dundee after getting violent with another bowler . 
She slapped a 26-year-old male player who , she claims , called her and her husband insulting names . 
The 60-year-old , who has been a member at the club on Dalkeith Road for 23 years , admitted she deserved some form of suspension for her rash actions but claimed the sanction actually relates to an ongoing sexism row . 
Although the incident happened in the middle of July , Kathleen was only informed of her punishment this week . 
She said : " I knew the guy who was involved . 
" He was doing a lot of name-calling that night , and I went over and gave him just a little slap . 
" I did it , and he kept saying hit me again , and when I did all his friends laughed at him . " 
Mrs Wright said he then got angry and threatened to knock her to the floor . 
She said : " This led to me being called to a disciplinary board at the club but I think they gave me such a big suspension after I irritated the members by making a complaint that there was not equal opportunity at the club . 
" I 've seen a lot worse things than that happen here . " 
Mrs Wright has been a licensed coach since 2005 , and she taught the player she was involved with in the altercation when he was a youngster . 
She has also represented the bowling club at several events , including twice being part of the winning side in the Scottish triples competition . 
Mrs Wright has not attended the club since the incident as she took a break to act as an umpire at the Commonwealth Games . 
" I am the only qualified umpire at the club and the women 's team have played in lots of national tournaments , " she said . 
" We pay the same for membership , so our games should be considered as important as the men 's . " 
Her husband John Wright , 56 , is currently a curator at the club . 
He claimed today that he will also leave the club over the incident after more than 30 years as a member . 
He said : " At the time of the incident I was the only one there who was not drinking , it just escalated so quickly . 
" I know Kathleen would have accepted a three-month ban , but after this I do n't really want to be a part of any bowling club , things have really gone sour . " 
Members and staff at Craigie Bowling Club were approached to comment on the allegations made by Mrs Wright , but refused on several occasions . 
Her " victim " could not be contacted for comment . 
This is not the first case of alleged sexism at bowling clubs in the region . 
A female bowler was expelled from Kirriemuir Bowling Club two months ago . 
Margaret Pollock was waging a solo war to " reform " . 
She became the first woman in the club 's 144-year history to pay for a full membership at the beginning of the current league season . 
The former head teacher was expelled from the club one month into the new season , however , after a special general meeting judged her to be bringing their game into disrepute . 
