Scotland's domain names boom

Scotland has embraced its own domain name destiny with more than 
    4,000 .Scot domain names being signed up in the first hour of the 
    domains being available.
Jesus.scot and Oor 
    Wullie.scot were among the first to be snapped up by keen 
    purchasers.
Others snapped up in the first minute were AfricanSafaris.Scot, 
    Gynaecology.scot, Labour.scot, Braw.scot, Braveheart.scot, 
    the45percent.scot, Happy.scot, Cocacola.scot, Great.Scot and 
    Facebook.Scot
Director of DotScot Registrar Gavin McCutcheon quipped: 
    "With more than 4,000 sign-ups in an hour that makes us 
    more popular than the SNP in a per hour basis for 
    sign-ups!
"It's fantastic news because we often see 
    people saying Scotland isn't digitally forward looking. I 
    think this helps put paid to that myth and I can't wait to see 
    what people do with their sites.
"And may I welcome OorWullie.Scot to the fold of 
    .scot sites. I haven't yet checked to see if it was registered 
    by the trademark owners or a fan – but if the same person wants to 
    do it for all The Broons family then they will need to be 
    quick.”
It puts Scotland on parity with the likes of Wales, London, 
    Berlin and New York City as having a domain of its own instead of 
    having to sign up to .com, co.uk or .uk.
There has been considerable interest in the domain since July 
    when the details and timetable of availability went mainstream. 
    Businesses were allowed to register for trademarks in July but 
    today sees the domain opened up to the world.
Gavin McCutcheon said while the recent referendum debate has 
    helped, “.scot transcends politics and the proof of that is 
    in the thousands who have signed up.”
He added: “There’s been huge interest in .scot since July 
    when we went public. We’ve seen strong interest from many sectors 
    but it’s particularly pleasing to see the international digital 
    giants like Facebook, Linkedin and Instagram get on 
    board.
“But it’s not just about the businesses – international 
    and local – it’s about individuals and I’m hearing lots of 
    individuals are getting involved which ties in with the whole ethos 
    of the web being for everyone.”
“That’s not to say the Indyref didn’t help. People on 
    both sides are now wanting to express their Scottish identity more 
    and I think it’s going to be really exciting to see what is 
    registered tomorrow and then what websites go live 
    quickly.
Finance Secretary John Swinney said: “With .scot domains 
    now generally available, people at home and abroad have a new 
    opportunity to express their Scottish identity or affinity 
    online.
“I also look forward to www.gov.scot being adopted in the 
    coming months as the primary web address for the Scottish 
    Government.”
