Edinburgh home to world’s first ‘Mistake Library’
by TOM PETERKIN
It wasn’t so much a Black Wednesday as a Jolly Tuesday 
    last night when Norman Lamont opened Edinburgh’s newest library – 
    the Library of Mistakes – which records a litany of financial 
    disasters.
More than 2,000 volumes telling tales of 
    mismanagement, from the Parable of the Talents through 
    the Great Depression of the 1930s to the 2008 credit crunch, have 
    been collected.
While guests enjoyed a few glasses of wine at the upbeat launch, 
    Lord Lamont of Lerwick made a wry speech suggesting that a wing of 
    the library should be devoted to the euro.
However, the former Conservative chancellor might have also been 
    reflecting on his own role in recent financial history.
As the man who was forced to withdraw sterling from the ERM 
    (exchange rate mechanism), he seemed an appropriate figure to 
    announce the creation of the new resource.
“You might find a little mention of myself in 
    there,” he said, perhaps looking back to Black 
    Wednesday.
Similarly, Edinburgh might be seen as the right place for such 
    an institution, being the base of Fred Goodwin while he presided 
    over the fall from grace of the Royal Bank of Scotland.
That, however, would be to miss the point. The purpose of giving 
    the public access to an unrivalled collection of economic mishaps 
    is to guide people towards the sort of economic performance 
    associated with the more successful side of Edinburgh’s thriving 
    financial sector.
“At the Library of Mistakes we can see the beauty in 
    mistakes,” explained Russell Napier, keeper of the library 
    and a consultant to Asia’s largest stockbroker, CLSA.
“Mistakes can sometimes be serendipitous, but even when 
    they are not, their study still has value as human progress is 
    based upon learning from mistakes.
“The more we know about why smart people do stupid 
    things, the fewer stupid things we might do. The Library of 
    Mistakes provides a resource for the study of such mistakes as we 
    fulfil our motto Mundum mutatu errore singillatim – changing the 
    world one mistake at a time.”
The charitable venture has been established thanks to the 
    generosity of several donors and its contents will be available to 
    those who register as readers.
Mr Napier is himself a keen student of financial mistakes. His 
    acclaimed book The Anatomy of a Bear: Lessons from Wall Street’s 
    Four Great Bottoms was published in 2005. By examining the lessons 
    from Wall Street depressions, he foretold the financial implosion 
    of 2008.
With a congenial reading room at Wemyss Place Mews in the heart 
    of Edinburgh, the Library of Mistakes is building up an 
    unparalleled reference library and online catalogue.
With George Osborne’s most recent Budget giving people the power 
    to cash in their pension funds, Mr Napier is hopeful the Library of 
    Mistakes will guide the public through that minefield. “This 
    is a free resource to the public. The public is making very serious 
    decisions about their personal finances and they are not 
    well-informed,” he said.
Another aim is to move the study of economics away from the dry 
    mathematical models, characterising the “dismal science” in school 
    and university.
Mr Napier added: “I want to stress that the audiences are 
    the professions – that would be bankers and fund managers, students 
    and the public.
“We want to lure students out of the universities and 
    away from writing lots of economic equations and get them down here 
    to study things that have actually happened.”
