Scots architect 's death being treated as suicide 

by TAMSIN TYESON 
AN architect found dead in a walk-in freezer in the garage of his luxury home committed suicide , a probe has established . 
Father-of-three Colin Machin , 50 , was found dead in the deep-freezer in Alva , Clackmannanshire , in June . 
Due to where he was found , police treated his death as " unexplained " and immediately launched an investigation . 
The investigation has now concluded and police said that foul play had been ruled out . It is understood his death is now being treated as a suicide . 
The actual cause of death remained unknown 
A certificate registered on Monday said the actual cause of death remained unknown " pending laboratory studies " . A Police Scotland spokesman said : " Enquiries have concluded and a report has been submitted to the procurator fiscal . 
" There are no suspicious circumstances and we are not looking for anyone in connection with the death . " 
The closure of the inquiry opens the way for Mr Machin 's funeral , which will take place at St Mungo 's Roman Catholic Church in Alloa next Wednesday . 
The Machin family have asked for only family flowers but for donations to be made to Rachel House Children 's Hospice . 
Colin left behind his wife , Maria , 51 , and daughters Sinead , 23 , and Erin , 21 . 
His youngest daughter Orla suffered from rare genetic condition Edwards ' Syndrome , and regularly attended the hospice in Kinross for respite until her death in 2008 , aged 10 . 
At the time of her father 's death , Erin paid tribute to him on social media with words from Dougie Maclean 's Caledonia . 
She wrote : " Let me tell you that I love you . 
" And I think about you all the time . " 
He co-founded award-winning architectural practice Machin Dunn & MacFarlane Ltd 
The Dundee University graduate ran Machin Associates and he and his wife rented out several holiday cottages at their home at Boll Farm . 
Last year he co-founded award-winning architectural practice Machin Dunn & MacFarlane Ltd , which was appointed to work on the redevelopment of a major site in Alloa . 
Mr Machin was also director of an Edinburgh based firm , Tigh Grain Ltd , which is due to start work on 48 social-rented houses on the former Alva Academy site . 
In addition to his work as an architect , Colin was tourism representative on the board of Clackmannanshire Business and was known for his charitable work through the Rotary Club of Alloa which he joined in 1992 and served as president in 1999 . 
Three weeks after Mr Machin 's death a business associate of his , Lloyd McFarlane , 54 , was found dead in a hotel room in Lagos , Nigeria . 
The Nigerian authorities gave no cause of death for Mr McFarlane , although he is believed to have suffered ill health . 
