Pup takes her first big steps in training

Meet Olga – the puppy who’s training to become a 
    Canine Partner.
We all know assistance dogs can make an incredible difference to 
    people’s lives. But how do you take a playful, boisterous little 
    puppy and turn it into an intelligent, thoughtful dog who will help 
    you all day long?
Whether it’s opening cupboards, getting you dressed, raising the 
    alarm if you take ill or unloading the washing machine, he or she 
    needs to be a highly-trained creature.
This year, we are going to follow the progress of Olga, a ball 
    of fluffy fun who’s being trained by Canine Partners, as she 
    embarks on her new life as an assistance dog. We’ll be tracking her 
    progress through her puppy training into advanced training.
Olga is being tutored in Southampton with love and care by her 
    puppy parent, Nicky Harris, under the guidance of a Canine Partners 
    puppy trainer, to learn the skills she’ll need when she is finally 
    teamed up with her disabled partner.
Olga will learn how to be an exemplary assistance dog, who’ll 
    support and help her human partner, following her time with Nicky 
    and a spell in advanced training.
Olga will stay with Nicky until she’s ready for advanced 
    training at 15-16 months old and during that time, she’ll be fully 
    socialised. She’ll also be introduced to many different 
    environments so that when she is partnered, she’ll be happy and 
    relaxed and be able to help her partner.
Olga will also attend regular puppy classes where she’ll meet 
    other would-be canine partners. For her first month with Nicky, 
    Olga will learn all the basic skills any puppy needs.
A good toileting routine, getting used to her crate — which will 
    become her safe place to sleep — learning her name and establishing 
    puppy recall while gently introducing her to the wider world, are 
    all key aims this month.
Nicky says: “Olga was only 4.6kg and a little bit subdued 
    at first when she arrived. Now, though, she’s really started to 
    show her character which is confident but wary with new 
    things.
“As soon as Olga arrived, we started her training, which 
    is to stand, sit, lie down and roll over when asked. We treat her 
    with sausages and cheese to make it fun.
“Her first outing was just a short carry round the local 
    roads so that she gets used to traffic. She’s being carried at the 
    moment while we wait for her vaccinations.
“She’s seen ducks and chickens at the local farm and 
    confidently walked down the aisles of the shops. I am starting to 
    get her to know her name by constantly using it to address 
    her.
“I’ll call her and when she starts to move towards me, I 
    click the clicker and treat her when she arrives. I train her 
    several times a day for very short periods of just a few minutes, 
    so that she doesn’t get tired.
“Olga likes to snuggle up with her toy monkey when she 
    goes to bed. She’s very good and sleeps from 9.30pm until 7am. 
    Bless her!”
• For more information about Canine Partners, to sponsor a 
    puppy, or if you’re interested in becoming a puppy parent, please 
    visit Canine Partners or call 08456 580480.
