School SOS reaches Disneyland
Written by Sarah Rollo
PUPILS from a Moray primary have been busy this summer spreading 
    their ‘Save Our School’ plea far and wide. 

From the waterways of Venice, to the Commonwealth Games arena, 
    and from Disneyland to ‘down on the farm’, Craigellachie Primary 
    youngsters have been publicly backing a future for their school.
Photographs of pupils posing with signs stating ‘SOS 
    Craigellachie Primary, Say No to Closing’ have flooded the ‘Save 
    Craigellachie Primary’ Facebook page over the holidays.
Other locations included John O’ Groats, at the seaside, at the 
    Craigellachie tennis courts, at the Scottish Open in Aberdeen, on a 
    slide at a sunny water park, and at the Glenfinnan viaduct.
With the new term underway, P1 pupil Jim Forsyth, of Mulben, was 
    named as winner for his picture posing in the KCR studio with DJ 
    Julie Ettles.
Jim has just started P1 at the school, where his older brother 
    Ian (8) is also a pupil.
“He’s just loving it,” said his mum Laura. 
    “It is a brilliant school. All the kids play together, you 
    see the P1s mixing with pupils right up to P7 in the 
    playground.
“Just two days ago, I was in at the school and they were 
    handing out fruit and vegetables they had grown in their wee 
    garden. It is just such a lovely place.
“Our kids get such a good start there, not just in terms 
    of education but the emotional and social aspects as 
    well.”
The threat to Craigellachie, as well as primaries across the 
    area and Milne’s High School, came under Moray Council’s 
    Sustainable Education Review, announced last year after it emerged 
    the school estate needed £70 million to bring it up to standard. 
    Consultants Caledonian Economics were called in to come up with a 
    list of ideas for the future of education in Moray.
A report, published in February, detailed far-reaching 
    proposals, including closures, mergers, new-builds, and 3-18 
    campuses.
Mrs Forsyth said the suggestion that Craigellachie could be 
    merged with Rothes Primary, or become part of a new 3-18 campus in 
    Aberlour, sent shock-waves around the community.
“It sickened us all, it absolutely sickened us,” 
    she said. “Now, we are trying everything we possibly can, we 
    are not going to go down without a fight.”
The steering group of elected members driving the process 
    forward are due to receive a final report from the consultants 
    today (Friday), with publication by the end of next week.  
A meeting of the full council on November 3 is due to debate the 
    report.
Craigellachie Parent Partnership chair Lorna Johnston urged 
    parents and community members to let Moray’s elected members know 
    how they feel.
“I’d like to stress the importance of everyone writing to 
    as many councillors before November 3, as that is when they will be 
    debating the new report.
“The councillors need to know how important keeping our 
    school open is,” she said.
Following the November talks, detailed development of proposals 
    will be carried out and then finalised in January.
Reports on the educational benefits of any proposals will then 
    be drawn up, followed by consultation in May and June 2015, with a 
    final decision expected next November.
