Health fears for deprived boys 
BOYS living in Scotland 's most deprived communities can now expect to live to just 46 before their health starts to deteriorate . 
A new Scottish Government report shows healthy life expectancy is declining in the poorest neighbourhoods , widening the gap between the wealthy and the poor . 
Boys and girls born in the most affluent parts of Scotland in 2011-12 can hope to reach the ages of 70 and 72 before suffering poor health , according to the government research . 
In contrast , boys in the poorest areas will only reach 46.4 . This suggests they will decline a whole year earlier in their lives than boys born in 2009-10 , who were projected by an earlier report to reach the age of 47.4 . However , the report 's authors argue the difference is not statistically significant . 
Dr Brian Keighley , chairman of the British Medical Association in Scotland , said : " For those people living in the most deprived communities the inequalities in health have never been more apparent . 
" The health effects of social inequalities are a huge burden on the NHS and while doctors can do all they can to treat these illnesses , they will not reduce the drivers of inequality in society . 
" Giving people access to jobs , good education , quality housing and welfare support would help to reduce the gap , thereby relieving pressure on the health service . " 
Minister for Public Health Michael Matheson said income inequality was the cause and the Scottish Government wanted to develop a welfare system to support those who needed it . 
He added : " This illustrates the fact that the full powers of independence would provide the opportunity to make substantial progress on tackling health inequalities . 
" We are continuing to take decisive action in areas we have control , for example to address alcohol consumption , reduce smoking rates , encourage active living , healthy eating , and promote positive mental health . 
" But without full control over areas like welfare , we are left having to deal with UK Government welfare policies that only threaten to make things worse . " 
However , Scottish Liberal Democrat health spokesman Jim Hume condemned the Scottish Government for raising the independence question and accused it of raising the white flag on tackling health inequalities . 
He said : " In five years the Scottish Government seems to have run out of steam in tackling health inequalities . Instead of setting out how they will tackle health inequalities today they are twiddling their thumbs and obsessing about their independence plans . 
" This miserable response to the real health inequalities faced across Scotland only shows that the SNP will do and say anything to achieve independence . Only five years ago they set out a detailed report on how to tackle health inequalities . 
" What a difference a referendum makes . " 
Scottish Labour 's Health spokesman Neil Findlay said : " The continuing story of health inequalities across the country is Scotland 's disgrace . 
" The Scottish Government need to be accountable here and not simply blame welfare cuts from Westminster . 
" There 's a much bigger picture to be looked at not least the current problems faced by the NHS , tackling unemployment , supporting young people in education and providing support in communities . " 
