Plan to close 23 council service points 
Written by Donna MacAllister and Val Sweene 

Staff will be briefed today on proposals to close two-thirds of Highland Council 's service points , including offices in Hilton and Ardersier . 
The region 's network of service points , which provide direct face-to-face access to council services , will shut to enable staff to attend today 's meeting in Inverness . 
The Inverness Courier has learnt the proposed hit list of 23 offices affected also includes Fort Augustus , Fortrose and Muir of Ord . 
Just 12 centres would remain across the region , including the Church Street office in Inverness and High Street in Nairn . 
Instead , up to 40 self-service machines would be installed in libraries . 
An e-mail to employees states that the number of customers attending service points has fallen significantly in recent years and transactions such as council tax payments could be done just as easily via self-service machines at a fraction of the cost . 
A report outlining the proposals , which affect about 100 service point staff , will be presented to the finance , housing and resources committee meeting on 26th February . The closure plans , set to be implemented by June 2015 , would save £ 160,000 a year . 
The trade unions are being consulted , although it is understood there would be no compulsory redundancies . 
News that Hilton could lose its service point , located in Oldtown Road , has dismayed community leaders . Angus Dick , community council chairman , said as a former Highland councillor for the area he had worked hard to secure the walk-in service several years ago . 
" I took considerable time and effort to get it open , " he said . " It took a lot of work away from the Church Street office , which was extremely busy . 
" I think closing Hilton would be a detrimental step . If the council needs to save money , it needs to look elsewhere . " 
He refuted the idea people could access services just as easily via the telephone or on-line . " A lot of the people these offices serve do n't have computers or on-line access , " Mr Dick maintained . " There will be a lot of resistance to these plans . " 
Maureen Ross , chairman of Hilton Community Centre , pointed out the service point was located in a hub known as The Village . 
" We are wanting to build it up and make it a place for people to come to , " she said . " It would be very disappointing if the service point were to go . People come from other places to use it because it is easier rather than parking in the city centre . " 
If the plans are approved , the Hilton service point , which deals with an average of 61 customers per week , will shut and self-service kiosks will be installed at Inshes and Culloden libraries . 
The Ardersier centre will be replaced with a self-service machine in the village 's library , while the facilities at Fort Augustus Memorial Hall will also be replaced by a machine . 
The Fortrose and Muir of Ord centres will be replaced with machines in the town 's libraries . 
The council plans to re-invest in the 12 service points which remain open , in a new website and in its call centre at Alness . 
* What do you think ? Email your comments to editorial@inverness-courier.co.uk 
