A9 travellers face traffic restrictions 
Written by Tom Ramage 

Traffic restrictions on two sections of the A9 are being imposed next week as work is carried out for the dualling programme . 
The restrictions , starting on Wednesday ( Oct 1 ) will " enable vital ground investigations to be carried out on the carriageway of the existing A9 as the dualling proposals are progressed " a Transport Scotland spokesman said . 
The work will take place on the A9 between Kincraig and Dalraddy – the first section to be dualled – and between Birnam and the Tay Crossing ( Jubilee Bridge ) . 
" It is anticipated that the investigation works between Kincraig and Dalraddy , which are the completion of work carried out in the summer , will take around two weeks , finishing on October 12 . " 
The work between Birnam and Tay Crossing , one of the most challenging parts of the route , is expected to take around 15 weeks , starting next Wednesday and finishing in early January 2015 . 
No works will take place during the two-week festive period , say Transport Scotland . 
" The work is needed to get vital information on the existing A9 carriageway as the Scottish Government 's plans to dual the route are progressed . 
" The traffic management arrangements will include relatively short contra-flow sections controlled by temporary traffic signals . 
" The contra-flow sections will be moved along the length of each scheme as the work progresses . 
" Transport Scotland apologises for any inconvenience caused by the works and thanks road users and local communities for their patience over the next four months . " 
The contractors for both GI works will closely monitor the operation of their traffic management to ensure that delays are kept to a minimum and that any incidents on site are quickly dealt with . 
" Road users are encouraged to visit the Traffic Scotland website in advance of any journey to get the latest information on the traffic management arrangements . " 
More on this in Thursday 's " Strathy " . 
