45% of Scots pupils taking Highers to sit old 
    exam
by SCOTT MACNAB
ALMOST half of Scottish pupils taking Highers this 
    year will sit the old exam and not the new qualification, according 
    to provisional figures.
Schools were given the option to phase in the new Highers after 
    teaching unions raised concerns about their implementation. All 
    pupils will study for the new qualifications, brought in as part of 
    the Curriculum for Excellence reforms, from the 2015-16 school year 
    on.
New figures from the Scottish Qualifications Authority show 
    that, of 217,976 provisional Higher entries across S5 and S6 this 
    year, 120,557 (55 per cent) are for the new exams and 97,419 (45 
    per cent) for existing Highers. The Scottish Government is being 
    accused of rushing through the overhaul and there are concerns that 
    the accuracy of pupils’ grades may suffer in the transition 
    period.
Opposition parties at Holyrood are now calling for an 
    investigation.
Only a third of pupils will sit the new science Higher this 
    summer – which takes in biology, chemistry and physics – while 65 
    per cent will sit the existing exam.
Almost half will sit the old Higher in maths, yesterday’s 
    figures revealed.
Union leaders have voiced concerns over a lack of funds, 
    materials and preparation time.
Jane Peckham, national official for Scotland of the NASUWT, said 
    the teachers were “on their knees” after the introduction of the 
    National Four and Five exams last year to replace Standard 
    Grades.
She said: “It’s a huge concern. The expectation that they 
    would suddenly turn to the new Higher is completely unrealistic. 
    These things need to be phased in sensibly, fully resourced, 
    everyone on the same page with what they’re doing.”
“To expect teachers to be able to have all the confidence 
    in the resources for the new Higher right off the bat, having done 
    the National Fours and Fives, is just unreasonable.”
There are also fears of a “knock-on effect” for pupils who sit 
    the old Higher, but then possibly have to sit the new Advanced 
    Highers.
More pupils are taking the new English Higher (61 per cent) and 
    the number of Highers taken overall this year has reached a record 
    high.
Seamus Searson, incoming general secretary of the SSTA union, 
    said the transition period is likely to mean “there will be 
    mistakes made”.
“There hasn’t been enough time to get this thing through 
    carefully and that concerns us,” he said. “A lot of teachers have 
    made a commitment to the new exams but they shouldn’t be penalised 
    if, in the end, the exam results aren’t as good as we would 
    expect.”
Asked if this could mean grades suffer, he said: “There’s 
    always a chance that will happen and that’s what worries teachers 
    and is probably why a good number of schools are sticking to the 
    old exams – safe rather than sorry.”
The new Higher was supposed to have been fully introduced this 
    year, but former education secretary Michael Russell agreed to 
    allow schools to opt out for a year after he came under pressure 
    from teaching unions.
EIS general secretary Larry Flanagan said: “The very high 
    take-up demonstrates the wisdom of pursuing this option. Schools 
    and teachers know what is best for their pupils and it is clear 
    that, for this year, many believe that the existing Higher is the 
    preferable choice.”
The new exams are part of an overhaul of classroom teaching as 
    part of the Curriculum for Excellence which aims to make education 
    in Scotland more broadly based and focused on learning, not 
    assessment.
The new education secretary, Angela Constance, said: “We 
    know from provisional entry data from the Scottish Qualifications 
    Authority that significant numbers of those pupils taking Highers 
    this year have been studying the new Highers. We listened to 
    schools who requested flexibility, and we acted.” 
She added that schools are making “good use of this flexibility” 
    and the new qualifications are being phased in, in a “sensible 
    way”. But Lib Dem education spokesman Liam McArthur called for a 
    probe into the high number of schools sticking with the old exam. 
    “Investigations must be made into today’s figures,” 
    he said.
“With as many as two-thirds of schools yet to participate 
    in the new Higher in sciences, and only one year until all schools 
    have to adopt them, the education secretary should continue to 
    update parliament on the status of the new curriculum.”
Labour education spokesman Iain Gray said low uptake in science 
    was a particular concern.
And Tory Liz Smith asked: “If pupils have studied for the 
    new Higher, will the new Advanced Higher be ready on time? That is 
    a very important question and it needs to be urgently 
    addressed.”
