Candid camera views from both sides of A9 controversy 
Written by Tom Ramage 

The war of words over A9 speed cameras continued as the keys to Highland polling stations were being dug out on Wednesday . 
Anti campaigner Danny Alexander ( Lib Dem ) blasted the SNP government in Edinburgh for ploughing on with the programme as the final cameras for the system between Perth and Inverness were being installed . The local MP has been campaigning to stop the cameras so that other safety measures can have time to make a difference . 
Mr Alexander said : " Thousands of Highlanders who are opposed to the A9 average speed cameras have been roundly ignored by the SNP . Not once have SNP ministers shown any willingness to listen to the sincerely-held views of people who think the cameras will do nothing but add to driver frustration . 
" Alex Salmond 's decision to put up the final cameras this week adds insult to injury . 
" In a week when we will have the chance to be heard , it is striking that the Edinburgh elite continue to ignore the widely held views of local people . 
" Highlanders can say ' No thanks ' to more of the same centralising tendencies of the SNP . Instead , people can send a message that we want powers to be returned to the Highlands . Then we will be able to improve safety on the A9 without compromising a vital transport link for the Highlands . " 
But local MSP Fergus Ewing ( SNP ) insisted his Westminster equivalent was " entirely wrong " . 
" Average speed cameras are being introduced on the advice of experts based on evidence of their use over many years in 16 UK ' A ' Trunk roads " he said . 
" That evidence shows , beyond reasonable doubt , that the use of average speed cameras has saved a great many lives , and also prevented horrendous injuries which cause misery to many families . 
" That surely is something which every responsible politician must support . It is utterly irresponsible that a Government Minister campaigns against the enforcement of the law , opposing the views of expert Police Officers . No one has a right to speed . " 
He claimed that the cameras had reduced UK deaths and serious injuries suffered in incidents by around 60 % . 
" A massive saving of lives . In Scotland where they have been used on the A77 , two fewer people have died each year than prior to their deployment . Lives saved . Misery and bereavement avoided . " 
The cameras have been installed on the A9 between Perth and Inverness over the past months . 
Mr Ewing insisted : " Even though the cameras are not yet in use , the number of vehicles breaking the speed limit by 10 mph or more has reduced from one in ten to one in one thousand . This extraordinary reduction in excessive speeding will reduce even further when they come into operation . 
" Does Mr Alexander not accept that this massive reduction in vehicles speeding recklessly is already a great outcome which is likely to have saved lives ? 
" Some argue that excessive speed itself does not cause incidents . But in a road incident , where one or more vehicles has driven above the limit , the impact will be severe , and death and serious injury the likely result . 
" Like many ' Strathy ' readers , I have used the A9 regularly for most of my life . The A9 is already safer since the cameras have been put in even though they are not yet operational . The average journey time has increased by only three minutes , and drivers are now largely observing the limit leading to a steadier flow of traffic . " 
Strathy readers wishing to see for themselves the facts can access them on HTTP://a9road.info/safety-statistics/safety-cameras . 
Local SNP MSP Dave Thompson insisted : " The only people who fear these cameras are those that persistently and dangerously break the law speeding . Danny Alexander has been told this repeatedly by the police and numerous traffic experts , but all he is concerned about is rushing a statement out criticising Transport Scotland and by extension the Scottish Government in a vain attempt to prevent a ' YES ' vote on Thursday . 
" This is pure politics I am afraid and it is a disgrace to use an issue like this in this way . " 
