Four hurt as plane with 28 on board veers off runway in 
    Hebrides
Two male passengers have been taken to hospital after 
    an aeroplane veered off a runway.

The incident involving the outbound Saab 340 aircraft operated 
    by Loganair happened at Stornoway Airport on Lewis at 8.33am 
    today.
The plane had been due to fly to Glasgow at 8.35am. After 
    leaving the runway the plane came to rest on the grass next to 
    it.
The Scottish Ambulance Service said two people were taken to 
    Western Isles Hospital with minor injuries. Police said that the 
    two injured passengers were male.
Two female passengers sustained minor injuries but declined 
    medical assistance.
An investigation has been launched and it is hoped normal 
    operations will resume once the plane has been removed from the 
    runway.
In a statement, Stornoway Airport said: "Efforts to 
    remove the aircraft from the runway are ongoing and investigations 
    into the cause of the incident are under way.
"It is our intention to resume normal operations as 
    soon as the aircraft is safely removed from the runway. There are 
    no scheduled arrivals or departures at Stornoway until later this 
    afternoon."
There were 28 people on board who have all been taken off the 
    aircraft.
The Scottish Fire and Rescue Service sent three appliances to 
    the scene.
A Police Scotland spokesman said: "A full air 
    accident investigation has now been launched and will be carried 
    out by the Air Accidents Investigation Branch in conjunction with 
    Police Scotland."
A Loganair spokesman said: "On departure from 
    Stornoway Airport the 8.30am flight BE6821 for Glasgow left the 
    runway during take off.
"The Saab 340 aircraft was carrying 25 passengers 
    and three crew members.
"All passengers and crew were safely evacuated and 
    returned to the airport's terminal. Two passengers sustained 
    what we understand are minor injuries and have gone to the local 
    hospital.
"A full investigation is now under way to ascertain 
    the cause of the incident and the Air Accidents Investigation 
    Branch has been notified."
