Computer firm ITP boosts software development

TECHNOLOGY company ITP Solutions is hoping to extend its use of 
    apps after qualifying for Highland Council’s Graduate Placement 
    programme.
The Inverness firm is hoping 22-year-old Ross Gough will help 
    accelerate its software development, in particular applying apps to 
    a range of business processes.
Mr Gough, who graduated from the University of Abertay Dundee 
    with a BSc in computer science, has been taken on under the work 
    placement scheme which sees the local authority pay 50 per cent of 
    his salary up to a maximum of £16,300 per annum. The placement must 
    last between six and 12 months.
"The scheme is perfect for ITP Solutions as it 
    allowed us to augment our existing skills set adding fresh skills, 
    while providing employment for an able under-employed local 
    graduate," said ITP’s managing director Sandy 
    Macarthur.
The Henderson Road firm’s clients include some of the Highlands’ 
    best known privately owned firms including Tomatin Distillery, Loch 
    Duart Salmon and Highland Industrial Supplies.
Founded in 1981, ITP underwent a management buy out in 2010 
    following the death of co-founder and managing director David Ross 
    which saw the Invergordon-based training division hived off. This 
    left ITP Solutions to focus on helping customers design, implement 
    and maintain their computer infrastructure and producing bespoke 
    software applications.

Mark MacKintosh, regional development officer with Business 
    Gateway, which administers the graduate programme, said Mr Gough’s 
    role at ITP showed how the scheme could respond to local needs.
"The aim is to help local businesses take on an 
    employee who will help them target new markets, increase exports or 
    develop a new business improvement project," he 
    said.
"At the same time graduates, like Ross, get the 
    opportunity to show what they can do and gain valuable work 
    experience that exploits and develops their 
    talent."
Business Gateway employs advisers Emma Gunn and Marianne Ross to 
    help companies identify projects that would qualify for graduate 
    assistance.
For information e-mail emma.gunn@highland-opportunity.com or 
    marianne.ross@highland-opportunity.com
