Rubbish fires are costing Scots million 

Arsonists who torch rubbish have caused £ 45 million worth of damage and left almost 100 people injured across Scotland . 
Since 2011 , firefighters have been called more than 25,000 times to put out rubbish fires , including flaming piles of fly-tipped trash , blazing wheelie bins and smouldering industrial waste . 
Around 90 % of those are thought to have been started deliberately , according to a Sunday Post freedom of information request . 
With each 999 call-out costing roughly £ 2,000 to deal with , the problem is likely to have cost £ 45 m over the last three years . 
Fire chiefs say the problem is fuelled by fly-tippers , who leave communities dotted with piles of flammable material . They say fly-tipping items acts as an " open invitation to vandals " . 
In the most serious cases , rubbish fires have spread to people 's homes and offices , resulting in almost 100 people being injured , some seriously . 
Group Commander for the Scottish Fire and Rescue Service Iain Goodlet said : " These fires can be horrendous . The smoke drifts everywhere . People with conditions such as asthma and bronchitis find it can exacerbate it . 
" There could be a lot more injuries than those reported . People might not report it or go to hospital themselves . " 
More than half of all deliberate fires in Scotland involve rubbish being set alight . 
Last month , £ 700,000 worth of damage was caused to a Tesco store in Glasgow after rubbish piled against a fence behind the store was set alight . The fire took hold and spread into the compound at the rear of the store causing an explosion in the electrical units . 
Mr Goodlet said fires started in common closets and stairwells of flats are often the most dangerous as they can send smoke billowing through several storeys . This can leave residents choking for breath and panicking . It also creates havoc for firefighters as it fills the only entrance in and out of the buildings with smoke and flames . 
Acting with police , fire chiefs are now vowing to do everything in their power to see pyromaniacs prosecuted . 
He said : " The idiots who set these fires deliberately are putting people 's lives at risk . These fires have the potential to cause death . 
" Also , if we are tackling these fires then we ca n't be out there saving people 's lives . It 's a needless waste of resources . " 
And he warned fire-raisers : " We have CCTV in fire engines . 
" We also liaise with police to get CCTV from buildings and have used police intelligence . " 
Last month , we revealed fly-tipping in Scotland now costs £ 53 million a year to tackle . 
