Indian satellite goes into orbit around Mars 

by KATY DAIGLE IN NEW DEHLI 
INDIA has triumphed in its first interplanetary mission , placing a satellite into orbit around Mars yesterday . 
In scenes broadcast live on television , scientists cheered as the orbiter 's engines completed 24 minutes of burn time to manoeuvre the spacecraft into place around the red planet . 
India is only the fourth nation or bloc of nations to send a craft into orbit around Mars . 
The total cost of India 's mission was 4.5 billion rupees ( £ 45 million ) – in contrast to Nasa 's Maven mission to Mars which cost £ 409 m . 
It is likely to be the cheapest of the interplanetary space missions . 
" We have gone beyond the boundaries of human enterprise and innovation , " prime minister Narendra Modi said at the Indian Space Research Organisation 's command centre in Bangalore . " We have navigated our craft through a route known to very few , " he added , congratulating the scientists and " all my fellow Indians on this historic occasion " . 
Scientists described the final stages of the Mars Orbiter Mission , affectionately nicknamed Mom , as flawless . 
The success marks a milestone for the space programme in demonstrating it can conduct complex missions and act as a global launchpad for commercial , navigational and research satellites . 
Reaching the fourth planet from the Sun is a major feat for the developing country of 1.2 billion people . 
India has a robust scientific and technical educational system that has produced millions of software programmers , engineers and doctors , as well as having large sections of the population living in poverty . 
India describes Mom as the first successful Mars mission on a maiden attempt by any country , although the European Space Agency , a consortium of several nations , also reached Mars on its first mission in 2003 . 
Rival China is also expanding its space exploration programme with a space lab in orbit before a future permanent space station is established . It landed a rover on the Moon late last year . 
Astronomy students who gathered at the Nehru Planetarium in New Delhi for Mars-themed learning activities and games were elated by the mission 's success . 
" I am proud to be born in a country that can do anything and succeed , " said Kashish , 12 . 
Another 12-year-old , Mansha Khanna , said she was so inspired she wanted to become " a scientist or an astronaut , and do research about other planets " . 
More than half the world 's previous attempts at getting a spaceship into orbit around Mars – 23 out of 41 – have failed . 
India wanted this spacecraft – also called Mangalyaan , or Mars craft in Hindi – to be a global advertisement for its ability to design , plan and manage a difficult , deep-space mission . 
India has already conducted dozens of successful satellite launches , including sending up the Chandrayaan-1 lunar orbiter , which discovered key evidence of water on the Moon in 2008 . It is planning new scientific missions , including putting a rover on the lunar surface . 
But India " is likely to be somewhat limited because we ca n't afford to spend that much money on pure science exploration , " said a spokesman for the Delhi Science Forum . 
India 's focus will remain on developing technologies for commercial and navigational satellite applications , which could bring in significant revenues from companies or governments seeking to place their own satellites or research equipment in space . 
MARTIAN CHRONICLES 
Nasa , which has conducted 15 successful missions to Mars , including a spacecraft that arrived in orbit on Sunday , congratulated India in a Twitter message welcoming Mom to studying the red planet . 
India 's 1,350 kg ( nearly 3,000 lb ) orbiter will now circle the planet for at least six months , with solar-powered instruments gathering scientific data that may shed light on Martian weather systems as well as what happened to the water that is believed to have existed once on Mars . 
It also will search Mars for methane , a key chemical in life processes on Earth that could also come from geological processes . 
The US has two more satellites circling the planet at the moment , as well as two rovers on the surface . 
