Duty to report will “set friend against friend” says 
    Councillor

The Vice-Chair of Comhairle nan Eilean Siar’s 
    Sustainable Development Committee has called on the Scottish 
    Government to set aside the duty on grazings committees to report 
    unworked crofts under new crofting legislation.
In a letter to Paul Wheelhouse MSP, Minister for Environment and 
    Climate Change, Cllr Donald Crichton states: “I am very 
    concerned, however, in regard to the main substantive change 
    proposed: the introduction of the duty to report falling on 
    crofters.
“In Comhairle nan Eilean Siar’s response to the 2012 
    consultation document, and previously in the Comhairle’s response 
    to the final consultation on the 2010 Act itself, the Comhairle 
    strongly advised against the introduction of the duty to 
    report.
“Elected Members were opposed to the proposed new duties 
    falling on both Common Grazings Committees and on individual 
    crofters.
He continued: “In the Comhairle’s response to the 
    Commission’s initial plan (2012) consultation the Comhairle 
    highlighted the fact that a third of Common Grazings Committees 
    were out of office at that time and was highly concerned that the 
    proposals would discourage active participation in Grazings 
    Committees.
“Unfortunately, and as predicted, that scenario has now 
    materialised, with reportedly almost half of Committees now out of 
    office.
“This is a serious impediment to the effective regulation 
    of crofting and has to be addressed if the Commission is to succeed 
    in its stated aim of more effectively regulating 
    crofting.
“Given the current lack of engagement or desire by 
    crofters to become involved with regulating other crofters, I 
    believe it is now essential that the Scottish Government instructs 
    the Crofting Commission to set-aside the duty to report falling on 
    Common Grazing’s Committees and on individual crofters.
“In the present circumstances proceeding with that 
    element of the Act would be reckless and would have the serious 
    consequence of setting crofter against crofter and friend against 
    friend.
“At the very least the Scottish Government should 
    postpone this element of the Act to allow a detailed rethink and 
    review.”
