Millions spent on dealing with illegal Traveller sites 

Millions of pounds of taxpayers ' cash is being spent dealing with the scourge of illegal Traveller camps . 
An investigation by The Sunday Post has found more than five unauthorised sites a week are springing up in towns and villages across Scotland . 
In hundreds of cases cash-strapped councils have been forced to launch expensive legal bids to evict families who set up on public and private land without permission . They have also been hit with huge bills to clean up the sites after the Travellers have moved on . 
Incredibly , however , the taxpayer often has to pay twice , as huge sums are also being lavished on official Traveller campsites , some of which are n't even full . In an ironic twist these were only set up to combat the relentless rise of illegal encampments . 
Critics warn the trend for unauthorised sites is blighting communities and affecting house prices amid a wave of complaints about fly-tipping , crime and other anti-social behaviour . However , police and councils are powerless to act because of archaic century-old legislation and guidelines that advocate a presumption against prosecution of Travellers . 
Labour MP for Glenrothes Lindsay Roy said : " It 's shocking the public purse is having to fork out money that can be ill-afforded just to get Travellers off land and then clear up the disgusting mess they leave behind . 
" In many ways , some Travellers feel they can stick the proverbial two fingers up to the authorities and get away with it . 
" But the thing is , they can . They get asked to move , stay for days , make a mess , then move on when they feel like it but only 200 yards along the road , starting the whole process again . " 
There is no specific law in place in Scotland to deal with unauthorised encampments . 
In theory , the 149-year-old Trespass ( Scotland ) Act 1865 can deem it an offence to set up a site without permission , but police are bound by guidelines issued by the Lord Advocate in 2004 that there is a presumption against prosecution of Travellers for such a crime . 
It means officers have no legal right or authority to clear illicit sites or move Travellers from land and to do so would be unlawful . 
Our probe using freedom of information law reveals there have been a staggering 2,868 illegal encampments set up in Scotland since 2004 , with the traveller population estimated to total more than 15,000 . There has also been at least £ 13.6 m of taxpayers ' cash spent on dealing with the issue over the same period . 
However , the figure is likely to be far higher , with 10 of the 32 local authorities either unable to provide data on their overall bill , or failing to respond to The Sunday Post . If the spend was extrapolated across all councils in Scotland it would give a total of about £ 4,800 a day . Of the local authorities that did provide information , Fife has spent the most , with almost £ 2.5 m coming from its coffers in the past decade , most of it to operate three council-run encampments . 
A total of £ 1.5 m has been spent by Aberdeen City , with officials revealing the operating cost of its authority-run Traveller site now stands at £ 106,730-a-year . 
In neighbouring Aberdeenshire , the council 's fully-serviced Greenbanks site in Banff , which has space for 40 caravans , costs at least £ 36,000-a-year to run . 
Officials also employ a part-time gypsy / Traveller liaison worker on a £ 20,000 salary . 
North Lanarkshire also has a liaison officer , on a pay scale of up to £ 34,494 . 
Highland , which spends £ 115,000-a-year on gypsy / Traveller initiatives , has forked out more than £ 1,200 on running Traveller awareness seminars for councillors in the past two years , and Edinburgh allocated £ 6,000 for pest control to Traveller sites last year . 
In East Lothian the 16-pitch authorised site at Old Dalkeith Colliery costs £ 90,614-a-year to operate , with a total of £ 444,595 spent by the council dealing with Travellers since 2004 . 
Our figures show five councils , including Falkirk , South Ayrshire , and South Lanarkshire , have handed out grants totalling £ 11,000 for food and clothing to Traveller families . And more than £ 217,000 has also been wasted on legal fees since 2004 as council officials went to court 223 times to evict Travellers . 
In addition , the Scottish Government has spent £ 5 m on dealing with Travellers since 2006 , half of it to charities and voluntary groups . A total of £ 1.3 m was allocated to a project for developing " e-learning and gypsy / Traveller education " . 
Ironically , many Travellers do n't pay council tax because they claim they do n't get a full range of council services . 
Mr Roy , who said a number of his Fife constituents have complained about problems with Travellers , said : " We are plagued by illegal encampments in high profile areas , whether that be public parks , on the roadside , on land owned by private businesses or in space used by the local authorities themselves . " 
Travellers have a long history in Scotland , with a number of references to them in royal circles during the realm of James IV in the early 16th century . When the first gypsies arrived in Denmark in 1505 they even carried a letter of recommendation from the Scottish king , and it is known Romanies danced at Holyrood Palace in 1530 . 
While they have been in Scotland for many centuries , they still retain much of their own cultures and customs . 
Author Jess Smith , who has penned books about Traveller heritage , said she is frustrated at the hostility towards her community and insisted more should be done to help gypsy families . 
She said : " I would n't say £ 14 m sounds a lot . For instance , how much does it cost to fight drug addiction ? Or how much is spent within officialdom on vanity projects ? 
" Councillors have to stop being afraid of the repercussions at the ballot box and open up more areas for Travellers . Let 's create peace , not war . " 
Fife Council leader David Ross defended the local authority 's spend by saying it " provides more site provision than most others " . 
He added : " We aim to provide a good range of services to Travellers and in return we seek their help in ensuring that unauthorised encampments do n't cause nuisance to surrounding residents or businesses . " 
Officials at the Scottish Government said gypsy / Traveller communities were funded as part of an overall £ 60 m spend from the Equality budget . 
A spokesman added Travellers are " among the most disenfranchised and discriminated against in Scotland " . 
One member of the Travelling community – Mark Leach-Vallely , 33 , who is currently living in rural Cumbria – said he has become used to feeling " demonised " . 
He said : " We 're the expensive bogeyman no one wants on their doorstep in case we bring down the neighbourhood or do something to peoples ' house prices . But , like Joe Bloggs in his semi , this is our life . What are we to do ? When we ask for greater protection we 're a burden to the taxpayer . When we do n't we 're a rogue menace . We 're damned if we do . Damned if we do n't . " 
