National Library buys 16th century books

by LUCINDA CAMERON
TWO OF THE first books to be printed in Scotland more 
    than 500 years ago have been bought by the National Library of 
    Scotland.
The Aberdeen Breviary was printed in 1509-10 and contains 
    services and readings for use in Scottish churches.
Bound at the back is the Compassio Beate Marie, which contains 
    orders of service and readings about the arrival of St Andrew’s 
    relics into Scotland and is the only known copy in existence.
The library said the purchase is a major acquisition that will 
    guarantee public access to an essential piece of Scottish 
    history.
There are three other surviving sets of the Aberdeen Breviary, 
    including one in the National Library’s collections.

National librarian Dr John Scally said: “This is a very 
    significant addition to our collection.
Aberdeen Breviary
“Each surviving copy of the Aberdeen Breviary makes an 
    important contribution to our understanding of how Scotland’s first 
    books were printed. As is often the case with the first products of 
    a printing press, the work was still somewhat experimental and many 
    corrections were made during the printing process.
“The Aberdeen Breviary is the only work which allows 
    comparisons to be made, shedding new light on Scotland’s first 
    experience with printing.”
The two-volume Breviary had been in the Earl of Strathmore’s 
    library at Glamis Castle in Angus for many years.
It was the only remaining copy in private hands and was offered 
    to the National Library by Christie’s, acting on behalf of the 
    trustees of the Strathmore Estates.
None of the copies are identical and some scholars consider the 
    one from Glamis to be the best surviving example.
Scottish saints
The Aberdeen Breviary was the first printed service book to 
    chronicle the lives of the Scottish saints and is thought to have 
    been compiled by the best Scottish historians of the day.
The library said it was the reason for James IV granting a 
    licence for printing to begin in Scotland.
The 16-page Compassio was printed between 1510 and 1532, 
    providing clear evidence that Scots continued to print their own 
    books after producing the Breviary.
Both books are written in Latin and, although partial 
    translations exist, there has never been a full translation or 
    scholarly edition of the text of the Aberdeen Breviary.
The library plans to work with academic partners to create a 
    scholarly edition of the text and a modern translation.
It has already digitised the Breviary and the Compassio which 
    will be made available through its website for everyone to see.
Walter Chepman
Helen Vincent, the library’s head of rare books and music, said: 
    “We are delighted to have brought these hugely important 
    examples of early printing in Scotland into public ownership where 
    they will be made widely available for study for the first 
    time.”
The Breviary also contains contemporary annotations, including a 
    set of verses and music. It was printed by Walter Chepman, who 
    owned Scotland’s first printing press.
Margaret Ford, Christie’s international head of books and 
    manuscripts science, said: “Christie’s is proud to have 
    facilitated the acquisition of the Aberdeen Breviary and Compassio 
    by the National Library of Scotland through a private negotiated 
    sale, thereby guaranteeing ongoing research and 
    accessibility.”
