Flood scheme finished ahead of schedule
ENOUGH material to fill 74 Olympic-sized swimming pools has been 
    removed from the bends of a Moray river.
The work – part of the £45 million Forres, Findhorn and Pilmuir 
    flood alleviation scheme – has created extra space for water when 
    the river swells in spate.

A key part is the removal of 185,000 cubic metres of material 
    from three of the river bends has been completed five months ahead 
    of schedule.
This means that the risk of flooding to homes and businesses in 
    and around Forres is already being reduced.
The scheme as a whole continues to progress more quickly than 
    expected thanks to long periods of favourable weather since its 
    start in September 2012.
Throughout 2014, work will continue on the flood embankments and 
    Pilmuir drainage channels and the A96 should be returned to its 
    original route by April, a month ahead of schedule and well before 
    the increased traffic from tourist season impacts.
Project manager Barbara Hellett said: "The flood 
    alleviation works are designed to provide a 1-in-200 year standard 
    of protection.

"This means that, once complete, homes and 
    businesses in Forres can expect to be protected from a pretty 
    extreme flood event for many years to come.
"A 1-in-200 year flood event statistically has only 
    a 0.5% chance of occurring in any one year. We currently anticipate 
    reaching this standard of protection by November 
    2014."
Chairman of Moray Council’s flood alleviation sub-committee, 
    Councillor George Alexander, welcomed the progress.
"It is certainly excellent news that Forres is 
    already better protected from flooding," he said.
"I’m sure we can all be grateful for this, 
    particularly given the dreadful flooding being experienced in 
    England.
"Barbara and her team are to be congratulated on the 
    progress of the project, and the fact that it is currently coming 
    in well under budget."
Funding for the scheme, which is scheduled for completion in the 
    spring of 2015, has come from Moray Council and the Scottish 
    Government.
