Patient approach needed at Inverness Airport Business 
    Park

PATIENCE will be needed as efforts continue to attract companies 
    to the Inverness Airport Business Park, the organisation’s new 
    chairman has warned.
More than three years after the 250 hectare project received 
    planning consent, Bond Air Services remains the only tenant and no 
    operator has come forward to run a hoped- for hotel.
However, David Hastings describes himself as “absolutely 
    positive” that the project will be a success.
“At one level you do have to have a patient approach even 
    if inwardly you are impatient and are trying to cover every 
    base,” he said. “I am only just beginning to dip my 
    toes into the water but it seems clear that all the ingredients for 
    success are there.”
Mr Hastings is taking over as chairman of Inverness Airport 
    Business Park from Alan Price, who is retiring after six years at 
    the helm.
As chief executive of the Strathleven Regeneration Company, a 
    post he will continue to hold, Mr Hastings has helped attract more 
    than £50 million to the Lomondgate development at Dumbarton and 
    sees many parallels with the Inverness development.
“Both are very ambitious projects and long term 
    proposals,” he said. “It is very difficult to 
    establish a new business location. At Strathleven the public 
    perception was that nothing happened for seven years but there was 
    in fact a lot of activity going on to put things in 
    place.
“Things came and went, then we were successful in 
    obtaining Aggreko as a tenant, which has just completed a £25 
    million manufacturing facility and transformed the 
    location.”
IABP is a joint venture between Highlands and Islands Airports, 
    Moray Estates and Highlands and Islands Enterprise.
Mr Hastings will not attend his first board meeting until May 
    but will take part in a strategy meeting over the next few weeks to 
    “take stock of things.”
He believes a proactive approach is essential, seeking out firms 
    in growth sectors which would gain a strategic advantage in being 
    located next to an airport. He also intends targeting companies in 
    industries which are expanding elsewhere in the region.
“Obviously I will engage in discussions with the board 
    but that is what I have seen work in other situations.
“Ideally you want to attract businesses that have a 
    rationale to be here rather than simply coming to take advantage of 
    attractive incentives offered by owners. That can mean firms moving 
    in for short term financial advantage and not because it is the 
    most sustainable long term location.”
Mr Hastings is optimisitic that IABP’s partnership with Roxhill 
    Developments, which signed a deal to develop phase one of the park 
    in 2011, along with plans to dual the A96 and establish a railway 
    station to serve the airport, will help stimulate activity.
His appointment has been welcomed by AIBP board member and 
    airport managing director Inglis Lyon. “David’s skills in 
    large scale commercial project development and global blue chip 
    contacts are exactly what we need to help attract businesses to 
    IABP,” he said.
Mr Hastings is married to Nuala Boyle, head of development at 
    the University of the Highlands and Islands in Inverness.
