Future of Inverness Castle to be debated by 
    councillors
Written by Helen Aird 
THE future of Inverness Castle is to be debated by city 
    councillors.
Discussions are ongoing between Highland Council, the Scottish 
    Government and the Scottish Court Service to find a solution, which 
    would see the sheriff and justice of the peace courts moved from 
    Inverness Castle, freeing it up as a tourist-related attraction.
The building is seen as central to plans to regenerate Inverness 
    city centre and pressure is growing on the government to find the 
    cash.
Now, it looks like Inverness City Committee will be given the 
    chance to debate the future of the castle, as well as Inverness 
    College UHI’s campus at Midmills which will become vacant when the 
    college moves to a new campus at Beechwood Farm next year.
Campaigners, who fear the campus will be sold on the open market 
    and turned into a hotel or flats, want the building, formerly 
    Inverness Royal Academy, to be turned into a tourist attraction 
    also.
Inverness Central councillor Richard Laird has requested that a 
    report on both landmark buildings is included on the agenda of the 
    next committee meeting, which takes place on 2nd September.
He has already said he would like to see both buildings turned 
    into tourist-related attractions and thinks a museum and art 
    gallery would suit Midmills. "The future of both 
    buildings has attracted a lot of public interest and I think it is 
    important that the elected representatives of the city debate that 
    future," said Councillor Laird.
"I have already said publicly what I think should 
    happen to these iconic buildings and I think my colleagues should 
    stand up and say what they think is best as well."
The Inverness Courier launched its Open the Castle campaign last 
    month, to ensure the opportunity is not missed to turn the castle 
    into a much-needed city centre tourist attraction.
It is supported by organisations such as Inverness Business 
    Improvement District, Inverness Civic Trust and Inverness Concern, 
    as well as Inverness MSP Fergus Ewing.
In an exclusive interview with this newspaper, the Scottish 
    tourism minister said he was confident money could be found for a 
    new court building if a suitable site was identified.
The frontrunner is the college’s other site in the Longman and 
    talks are taking place to see if it can be transferred to the court 
    service for free. Proceeds from the sale of the site will go to the 
    government, which is funding the new college building through the 
    Scottish Futures Trust.
Meanwhile, Inverness City Heritage Trust hopes to fund and 
    commission its own feasibility study into possible uses for the 
    Midmills campus, a move backed by local councillors and the civic 
    trust.
