Wind farm will kill golden eagles , say protesters 

by COURTNEY CAMERON 
A PLANNED wind farm could kill golden eagles in the blades of its 24 turbines , environmentalists have warned . 
Black throated , great northern and red throated divers , dotterels , white-tailed eagles and hen harriers are also threatened by the scheme planned for an area between Loch Rannoch and Loch Ericht , one of Scotland 's last wildernesses , experts said . 
Ospreys , which nest in forestry to the west and fly over the area to fish in lochs Ericht and Mheugaidh , could be killed too . 
The developer Netherlands-based Eventus BV , has insisted the scheme can fit into the landscape . But Scottish Natural Heritage said the Talladh-a-Bheithe wind farm would have a damaging effect on birds and mammals , including bats and otters . 
Hundreds of residents , businesses and landscape protection organisations also oppose the scheme , including the Mountaineering Council of Scotland ( MCofS ) , the John Muir Trust and the Keep Rannoch Wild campaign . 
In a submission to the Scottish Government , MCofS cites evidence from George Macdonald , who recently retired after 23 years as head gamekeeper on a local estate . Mr Macdonald said : " I am very familiar with the wildlife that abounds in the Rannoch area and rare species that frequent the site of this proposed scheme . 
" I wish to object to this planning application on the grounds that the scheme is likely to have significant negative impacts on bird species . " 
He said the area was a prime hunting ground for the eagles which nest on high ground nearby . He feared mammals , including otters , which use the Allt Ghlas and its tributaries , would also be affected . 
SNH argued that , on average , one golden eagle every 19 months could be killed by the planned turbines . 
MCofS chief officer David Gibson said : " Scotland 's mountains and wild lands are one of our greatest treasures and must be protected . This ill-considered , inappropriate and deeply unpopular scheme is a serious threat both to our wildlife and to the sustainable tourism businesses which rely on visitors wanting to come and experience our open , empty spaces and the birds and animals which thrive there . " 
Mr Gibson fears the huge turbines would affect views from Schiehallion , the Ben Alder massif , the mountains above Glen Lyon and Loch Tay , and some above the Drumochter Pass . 
A spokesman for Keep Rannoch Wild said : " This rare and precious habitat is essential for the success of breeding eagles in Rannoch . 
" It provides a base from which they are slowly but surely re-colonising their old territories in Highland Perthshire . 
" It would be an outrage if they were displaced by construction activity and , even more so , if any were damaged or killed , as would be likely , by this insensitive and speculative scheme . 
" The site that Eventus proposes should be cherished , not bulldozed and concreted . " 
A spokesman for Eventus said : " We are currently in the process of analysing all feedback and will respond through the appropriate channels . " 
