' We have to make sure we get the most talented pupils ' 
AS the wave of anticipation surrounding Glasgow 's staging of the 2014 Commonwealth Games continues to build , Angie Porter recalls with a laugh her role at the 1986 event in Edinburgh . 

" I was a student at the time and got the chance to be a medal presenter , so I had to walk out with the little cushion , but not for any of the glamorous , exciting sports , " she grins. " It went by height , apparently – at least , that 's what they told me – so all the tall girls got athletics and swimming . I was short , so I got weightlifting. " 
As director of Glasgow School of Sport , Scotland 's only school dedicated to sporting excellence , you would expect her to be excited about the forthcoming Games . Sitting behind her desk in her small , jam-packed office in the south side school , the 47-year-old is realistic about her own students ' chances : " We work with some extremely talented young sportspeople but very few of them will make Commonwealth Games selection , " and frank about the challenges facing young sport stars thrust into the spotlight . 
" It can be like a goldfish bowl at times , " she says . " They come to us at the age of 11 and face the same pressures all young people face . It is about managing the balance between talent and success , and not all will succeed . " 
The Glasgow 2014 buzz is building . " We 're going to have 11 days of world-class competition on our doorsteps and I think , after the Delhi Games handover ceremony , there is a real sense of , wow , what can Glasgow do here ? " she says . " Glasgow has never had the opportunity to host the Games – this is our city 's chance to shine . 
" And I hope we use it to harness this growing enthusiasm for sport and keeping fit . There are lots of good programmes already , so let 's build on them during and after the Games . " 
Dumbarton-born Porter grew up loving sport of all sorts , mystifying her decidedly un-sporty family . " I 'd be rushing about , getting ready to go out and play hockey for the second time on a wet Saturday and my mum would say , ' But it 's raining , would n't you rather stay in ? ' she laughs . " I think my mum and dad were a bit baffled by it . They are not couch potatoes , not in the slightest ; they are principled , fun , supportive people , and I am lucky to have them still in my life . But they just do n't do sport . " 
She jokes : " Neither of them , nor my brother , can swim . I had to teach myself and I consider it my greatest failure in life that I have still not managed to teach them too . " 
After toying with the idea of " doing something creative " at art college , she settled on sports management at Dunfermline College of Physical Education . " I knew I wanted sport in my life , but I did n't want to teach , " she explains . 
Following graduation and a spell managing sports centres , she became one of Glasgow 's first two Women in Sport officers , appointed to encourage more women to get active . 
" It was exciting , because we were given free rein , almost , and we accomplished a lot – setting up the jogging network , for example , and helping to stage the city 's first women 's 10k . I was – still am – passionate about getting rid of the barriers which stop people participating in sport . For women , it 's not always cost , it 's body image , family commitments , the timing of classes , lack of creches . " 
She adds : " It annoyed the men at first . We got lots of complaints about what we were doing but that was a good thing . Men had finally realised there was more to sport than football . " 
She believes that while great progress has been made through initiatives such as the Active Schools programmes and Glasgow Club , much has still to be done . " There are different barriers facing the new generation . Technology is a huge barrier : iPods , iPads , iPhones . There is too much emphasis on sitting down and communicating , and not enough on getting up and doing . " 
After four years managing Scotland 's national governing body , Fitness Scotland , she became director of the School of Sport , which is funded by the Scottish Government and run by Glasgow City Council , when it opened its doors in 1999 with just seven pupils . 
" It was a low-key start , we have always avoided the razzmatazz , I suppose . There has always been a lot of interest in us , but it 's been a slow-burn. " 
Things changed in 2010 when seven of the school 's pupils were selected for the Delhi Commonwealth Games , and former pupil and swimmer Michael Jamieson won a silver medal in London last year ; the school had its first Olympian . 
" It was fantastic . We 're very proud of Michael and not just because of the medal , but because of the person he has become . " She breaks off with an apologetic laugh . " That sounds really cheesy . But we have had around 500 kids through our doors and we 're proud of all of them , whether they are coaches , or physiotherapists or sports managers . How do you measure success , anyway ? Is it the number of Olympic medals , or ' positive destinations ' or responsible citizens you produce ? 
" You ca n't do this job and not believe in it 100 % . To work in high performance sport you have to be determined , you have to shout loudly for your share of the resources because there is not enough to go round . 
" This job is not what I imagined doing . I was passionate about encouraging people to get into sport , and high performance seemed to branch away from that . But in fact , it 's not different at all . The kids who come here have a talent , but they are not instantly fantastic . 
" Our job is to keep them motivated , to encourage them and support them , not just the ones who do brilliantly at the weekend and come in to show us their medals , but those who do n't do so well , who perform badly or get injured and suddenly start to question what they are doing . " 
It is the one aspect of her job she dislikes . 
" It 's a dream job , after all – working with young people who want to come to school , " she smiles , before adding , more seriously : " But I know the buck stops with me . For some young people who come here , it does not work out . I do n't want to be that person , sitting there , telling them things have come to an end . Sometimes there is a sigh of relief , but often there are tears . That 's really hard . " 
Students at the School of Sport , which is based at Bellahouston Academy , follow a balanced curriculum of academic studies together with one of five sports specialisms : athletics , badminton , gymnastics , hockey and swimming . 
" We never struggle to fill places , " she says . " As we are the only school of sport in Scotland , many families relocate to allow their children to come here . They are making a huge commitment so we do not want to let them down . We have to make sure we get the most talented pupils and the best coaches . 
" One school can only do so much . When the SNP came to power they said they would like to see six schools like ours across Scotland . I think more sports could benefit from the kind of set up we have here . " 
The 47-year-old is married to Mike , a retired schools inspector who specialised in PE . They met at a conference 15 years ago . Away from work , they are exhaustingly fit , regularly skiing , cycling and going to the gym – proof , if it were needed , that you can not work in the world of performance sport and not have at least a little bit of it rub off . 
" I 'll never win medals . But you ca n't fail to be inspired when you are surrounded by such enthusiastic , talented people . Mike has had a couple of illness scares in recent years and since then we 've both realised there is no point in getting caught up in stuff that 's just not important . " 
She grins : " Mike 's always been a bit of an inspiration to me . We 'd exercise together and I 'd be completely knackered , but he 'd still be going and he 's a bit older than me , so I 'd have to keep up . We both understand the importance of being fit and healthy . When someone gets ill , you can either put your head down , batten the hatches and give up , or you can live your life . " 
