Lottery fund gives £3m to restore remote landscape and 
    help wildlife
the peaks of Quinag, 
    Canisp, Suilven, Cul Mor, Stac Pollaidh and Ben More Assynt define 
    the unique landscape of one of Scotland's most beautiful and 
    remote regions.

The Coigach-Assynt area of north west Scotland also has 
    moorlands, lochs and a coastline that provide habitats for species 
    such as golden eagles, wildcats, black-throated divers and 
    freshwater pearl mussels.
Today, the Heritage Lottery Fund will announce that a grant of 
    £3 million, including £100,000 development funding, has been set 
    aside to help conserve the area as part of a landscape partnership 
    project covering 150,000 acres of this part of Ross-shire and 
    Sutherland.
It means the money will be released if a fully developed 
    application is successful, which it normally is after this first 
    hurdle has been overcome.
The project is part of a wider 40-year vision, developed by a 
    partnership led by the Scottish Wildlife Trust. Its goals are to 
    restore parts of the landscape, including regenerating and 
    reconnecting the remaining native woodland, restoring blanket bog 
    and heath moor, and repairing and improving pathways.
The Iron Age settlement at Clachtoll Broch, a local centre of 
    power in 300BC, will be excavated and preserved. Local people and 
    visitors will also be involved through a comprehensive volunteering 
    programme and a cultural learning programme that will increase 
    understanding of this vast area's complex heritage.
Colin McLean, head of the Heritage Lottery Fund in Scotland, 
    said: "Nature lies at the very heart of what makes 
    Scotland special and nowhere is that more evident than the 
    astounding scenery of Coigach-Assynt.
"However, the enormous pressures upon these 
    landscapes mean we have to tackle their restoration and 
    conservation on a bigger scale than ever before.
"The Landscape Partnership programme does just that, 
    and more. It brings real cohesion to the natural and built heritage 
    of the region while reconnecting its communities with the nature 
    that lies on their doorstep."
Viv Halcrow, project manager of the Coigach-Assynt Living 
    Landscape, said: "This funding could have a great 
    impact across the whole Coigach-Assynt Living Landscape.
"It would benefit the natural, cultural and built 
    environment and could help to increase integration between 
    communities, landowners and organisations.
"The partnership is very grateful to have received a 
    stage one pass and is looking forward to developing the project in 
    preparation for a stage two submission."
