Moray ' No ' campaigners celebrate vote result 

MORAY 'S referendum result was greeted with a mixture of both cheers and tears from activists in the hall where the count took place . 
The 57.5 % vote for the No camp went against many predictions beforehand . 
Moray councillor Sean Morton , who has been selected to represent Labour at the next general election , expressed the view that the result would have momentous consequences . 
Speaking at the Fishermen 's Hall in Buckie immediately after the result was announced , he said : " Firstly , I 'm very , very proud of all of us – the volunteers who helped with the campaign . 
Even in the last few weeks when it looked as though we were going to be losing for definite here , day after day , night after night , they knocked on doors . 
" I do n't think we were ever expected to win in Moray , and certainly not on this scale . 
" So I 'm just amazed and very proud . 
" But I think we need to remember as well that the country voted for change . They did n't vote for separation but they have voted for change . 
" Everybody on the doorstep said that they wanted things to change . They want more powers for Scotland . 
" I think this is going to have wide reaching consequences across the whole of Britain . I think there 's going to be a radical shake-up . 
" That 's what we have been campaigning about – we want to change the whole country for the better , rather than just for the people who live in the north of Britain . " 
From an historically unprecedented turnout in Moray of 85.4 % of registered voters a total of 36,935 ticked the No box on their ballot paper , compared to 27,232 who voted Yes . 
Moray councillor Douglas Ross , who contested the last general election for the Conservative and Unionist party , stressed the importance of Scotland now looking to the future . 
He said : " I have a lot of sympathy with the Yes campaigners . 
" Most of us on the No side have only found ourselves drafted into this debate in the last three or four years . 
" But many Yes campaigners have been fighting for what they believe in for most of their lives . 
" However , the majority of people have now made it clear how they feel . 
" I 'm delighted that , firstly , that we have won the referendum . 
" Secondly , I 'm really pleased we have won the campaign in Moray which is an SNP heartland . 
" This should be the only time in my lifetime that Scotland goes through a similar referendum . 
" The results up and down the country tonight should have put the question to bed . " 
Speaking after the Moray result was finally announced at 6.08 am , James Allan said : " I 'm delighted but absolutely shattered . 
" To be honest I 'm not surprised by the result in Moray . 
" Going round canvassing and listening to what people were saying on the doorstep you got the impression that the majority believed that we are better together . 
" Then at the polling stations folk kept coming up and making their support known to us , or they were giving the thumbs up sign as they came out of the polling booths . " 
