Fiscal to rule over city fire death charge
Written by Helen Aird

CROWN office lawyers will decide whether anyone should face 
    prosecution over the death of an Inverness woman in a fire at her 
    home.
Barbara Anderson, who had spina bifida and used a wheelchair, 
    was overcome by fumes at her flat in Leyton Drive, Hilton, last 
    August.
The Inverness Courier later revealed that the Telecare system, 
    which is fitted in the homes of thousands of elderly and vulnerable 
    people across the region, failed to automatically alert the central 
    call centre when fire broke out. Instead, neighbours called 999 
    when they noticed smoke pouring out of the flat.
A six-month police investigation into the incident has now 
    concluded and a file passed to the procurator fiscal for a decision 
    on whether to prosecute and if a fatal accident inquiry (FAI) 
    should be held.
Ms Anderson’s family, however, have criticised the delay and say 
    they are no nearer learning the truth.
"We have had no sense of closure," said 
    Ms Anderson’s sister Darlene Kocsis, who lives in Ontario, Canada. 
    "Six months is too long to keep a family waiting for 
    answers. At the end of day it is about getting answers as to why 
    this accident happened and why this system failed so this does not 
    happen again to someone else."
The Leyton Drive flat was only handed back to the family this 
    week after being treated as a potential crime scene by detectives 
    since August.
"Barbara was a very proud person and would not have 
    wanted her flat left unattended for six months," Mrs 
    Kocsis added. "It bothers me greatly that there may be 
    food spoiling, a dirty cat litter box, dishes and perhaps even her 
    clothes in the washer. I keep thinking about the other tenants in 
    the building and how they must be feeling."
Ms Anderson’s other sister, Beverly Mason, of Winnipeg, Canada, 
    said it was "beyond ridiculous" that the 
    family were no closer to discovering why the alarm system, which 
    had only recently been installed, failed.
"It doesn’t seem like anyone involved in the 
    investigation truly cares about her as an individual or the people 
    who have been affected by her death," she said.
Police believe the fire started in the electrics of Ms 
    Anderson’s wheelchair. It is understood a report on the cause of 
    the fire was submitted to the fiscal some time ago but inquiries 
    into the Telecare system have taken longer.
The alarm failure prompted NHS Highland to launch a region-wide 
    review of Telecare, which is installed in the homes of around 3700 
    people throughout the Highlands and Islands. Everyone with Care at 
    Home and Telecare packages has had their equipment tested, 
    amounting to more than 2000 tests. Health officials are now 
    examining how the system can be better managed after admitting 
    routine testing did not take place prior to the fatal fire.
A police spokeswoman said that access to Ms Anderson’s property 
    had always been available to the family but the property had been 
    kept to "maintain the integrity" in case further 
    investigation was necessary. She added contact had been maintained 
    with next of kin, although the family say communication has been 
    minimal in recent months.
Ms Anderson, who died the day after celebrating her 51st 
    birthday, was a retired civilian police worker. Highlands and 
    Islands MSP John Finnie, a former police officer, knew her and is 
    supporting calls for an FAI to be held.
"People understand that with an investigation of 
    this nature it will take time, but Police Scotland and the Crown 
    Office have an important role to play in reassuring the public that 
    there is no cause for concern and that families are being properly 
    dealt with," he said. "Neither is the case 
    at the moment. I would urge early decision-making and sharing of 
    information with the public, many of whom will have relatives or 
    friends who make use of Telecare services."
Telecare alarms allow elderly and disabled people to summon 
    immediate assistance. The equipment consists of a base unit and 
    small transmitter which can be worn around the neck or clipped onto 
    clothing. When activated, the base automatically links to a hub 
    where operators can summon help. Smoke alarms can also be connected 
    to the unit, ensuring the fire service is alerted without delay.
The Health and Safety Executive and Medicines and Health Care 
    Products Regulatory Agency — a government agency responsible for 
    standards of safety in relation to therapeutic products — have been 
    involved in the police investigation.
