Buckie area schools fight closure 

PARENTS from a cluster of Moray primaries have combined to form a united front against school closures . 
A Four School Action Group ( FSAG ) has been established to protect Portessie , Findochty , Portknockie and Cullen primaries amid Moray Council 's ongoing sustainable education review ( SER ) . 
Early ideas penned by consultants Caledonian Economics for the future of Moray 's school estate showed the primaries could be axed , merged , or become part of a new coastal campus . 
With a final report from the advisors expected by the end of this month , FSAG has launched its own survey to gauge what local people think . 
Representative Mike Coull said the findings presented by the specialists to date had engendered little confidence amongst parents and other community groups . 
" The feedback we 've had from people who 've been involved with the SER is that the surveys conducted by Caledonian Economics seemed to be leading towards a preconceived goal , " he said . 
" There 's a definite feeling they went into the process looking to vindicate their own ideas , which can basically be boiled down to : big school equals good ; small school equals bad " . 
" We in the FSAG feel our communities deserve a lot better than this and should have their real opinions heard . The action group wants to hear these views and use them to help build a case to defend the future of our village schools . 
" With that in mind , we 're launching our own online survey asking straightforward , yes or no questions about what people think . " 
The survey can be found online at http://bit.ly/1s25dWI and the FSAG can be contacted at FourSchoolActionGroup@yahoo.co.uk . 
" I would urge as many people as possible to come forward and make their opinions known – do n't leave it until it 's too late , " Mr Coull added . 
Under the current timetable , the steering group driving the process forward are due to receive a final report by September 19 , with the findings published the following week . 
A meeting of the full council on November 3 is due to debate the report , followed by the detailed development of proposals which will be finalised in January . Reports on the educational benefits of any proposals will then be drawn up , followed by consultation in May and June 2015 , with a final decision expected next November . 
The SER – full details of which can be found under the ' Spotlight ' link at www.moray.gov.uk – was launched last year after it emerged Moray 's school estate is in need of £ 70 million of investment to bring it up to suitable standards . 
Possibilities impacting on schools , including three to 18 campuses and mergers have been up for consultation . 
