Making history: Scotland's first same-sex 
    weddings
Two couples have tied the knot on the stroke of 
    midnight in Scotland's first same-sex weddings.

Joe Schofield and Malcolm Brown, both 42, and Susan 
    Douglas-Scott, 54, and Gerrie Douglas-Scott, 59, are the first of 
    17 couples to marry on Hogmanay.
MSPs passed the Marriage and Civil Partnership (Scotland) Bill 
    in February, making Scotland the 17th country in the world to 
    legalise same-sex ceremonies.
More than 250 couples have converted their civil partnerships to 
    marriage since the law came into effect on December 16.
Today is the first day after the usual 15-day notice period for 
    marriages that same-sex weddings can take place.
Mr Schofield, a public health worker, and Mr Brown, a former DJ, 
    both from Tullibody in Clackmannanshire, have been together for 
    nine years and were married by Humanist Society Scotland celebrant 
    Ross Wright at the Trades Hall, Glasgow.
In a statement, they said: "We are very proud to be 
    one of the first couples in Scotland to be able to officially call 
    ourselves husband and husband.
"This is an amazing chapter in Scotland's 
    history which we are all witnessing and can be proud of.
"Scotland is leading the way in fairness and 
    equality for all, and we would like to thank all those who 
    campaigned so tirelessly for this change."
The Douglas-Scotts, who are both humanist marriage celebrants, 
    live in Glasgow and have five grown-up children.
They had a civil partnership in March 2006 and decided to 
    convert it through a full marriage ceremony at a private venue in 
    the city.
The couple said: "We are delighted that, at long 
    last, after 18 years together our love finally has the same 
    recognition in law and society as all other married 
    couples.
"As humanist celebrants ourselves, we have had the 
    privilege of marrying many hundreds of people over the last few 
    years and so we know how special and important marriage 
    is."
Both couples were joined by family and friends as well as 
    lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex (LGBTI) equality 
    campaigners.
First Minister Nicola Sturgeon and Green MSP Patrick Harvie 
    acted as witnesses at the marriage of the Douglas-Scotts while 
    Scots Makar Liz Lochhead and local government and community 
    empowerment minister Marco Biagi acted as witnesses for Mr 
    Schofield and Mr Brown.
Mr Biagi said: "With a new year nearly upon us, 
    there really is no better way to celebrate than by watching these 
    two people get married and make that lifelong commitment to each 
    other.
"I am proud of our Parliament in passing the 
    Marriage and Civil Partnership (Scotland) Act 2014, and proud of 
    Scotland and the country that we are fast becoming.
"One that is tolerant and fair and that recognises 
    the rights of all its citizens regardless of race, gender or sexual 
    orientation."
Tom French, policy and public affairs co-ordinator for the 
    Equality Network, said: "This is a big day for many 
    couples and their families, but it is also a milestone moment for 
    Scotland as a whole.
"After many years of campaigning, we have overturned 
    discrimination in the law and same-sex couples now have the equal 
    rights and recognition that they should always have been entitled 
    to.
"There is undoubtedly more that we need to do as a 
    society to tackle prejudice and ensure equal treatment for LGBTI 
    people, but today is a day of celebration and a chance to reflect 
    on just how far we've come."
