Art review: John Shankie | Louise Hopkins

by Moira Jeffrey
When Able Seaman George Watson left his home in 
    Russell Street, Falkirk, for service in the First World War, he was 
    departing forever.
JOHN SHANKIE: REFRACTORY AND 
    REFRIDGERATION
The Park Gallery, Falkirk
***
LOUISE HOPKINS: BLACK SEA, WHITE SEA
Linlithgow Burgh Hall
****
COUNTER-POINT
Talbot Rice Gallery, Edinburgh
***
Watson was just one of 700,000 British servicemen to lose their 
    lives and is now a single name amongst an estimated 16 million 
    soldiers and civilians worldwide to die in the conflict.
How and why we might remember them has been part of a powerful 
    debate this summer on the legacy of the war, as candles have been 
    lit, streetlights extinguished and prayers read in remembrance.
For artist John Shankie, whose Lanarkshire grandfather drove an 
    ambulance at Ypres, it has been a case of bringing the war back 
    home. For a few minutes earlier this year a curtain of Belgian lace 
    hung in the upper window of a plain-fronted sandstone building in 
    Russell Street. That curtain now hangs in Callendar 
    house, Falkirk, alongside a photo 
    of the flat where Watson once lived. As Geoff Bailey, Falkirk’s 
    Keeper of Local History, has established a database of the names 
    and addresses of local men lost in the war, Shankie has written to 
    current residents of their former homes to ask them if they would 
    help him mark the loss, acknowledging “the surprise or 
    sadness such poignant historic information might bring.”
This simple work is emblematic of the precise and poignant 
    poetry of Shankie’s show Refractory and Refrigeration at the Park 
    Gallery, once a venue in its own right, now tucked away in a single 
    room at Callendar House. In exploring his own family history, from 
    a found brick imprinted with the word Cleghorn, the name of the 
    village where he grew up, to a brass vase that belonged to his 
    grandmother, Shankie gains traction on much wider questions of 
    memory and inheritance.
There are fragments of a rusted disc plough that has worked the 
    bone-filled soil near Passchendaele, a brass shell-case that was 
    once transformed into a clumsy vase as an emblem of swords into 
    ploughshares. Each work is a single brick in a much larger 
    architecture of history and of word association. In an echo of the 
    wordplay of concrete poets and artists like Ian Hamilton Finlay, 
    there are two beautiful digital photographs that take the ordinary 
    stuff of domestic life – a shell of the kind that you find on the 
    beach and a marble mortar from the kitchen cupboard – and thus 
    invite you to remember how language itself has been soiled by 
    warfare.
When local school children visited the graveyards and 
    battlegrounds of the First World War killing fields they brought 
    Shankie back a Belgian brick. He has tended it carefully and 
    nestled it in Scottish mortar. When he explored the technical 
    skills of brick laying he discovered that each brick pattern has 
    its own distinctive nickname. He has laid them out in serried 
    ranks: the stretcher, the header and the shiner; the soldier and 
    the sailor.
Just a few miles away in the recently refurbished Linlithgow 
    Burgh Hall another exhibition in the Generation project is 
    dedicated to the painter Louise Hopkins. Spanning some 20 years and 
    ranging from the largest of paintings to the smallest most 
    insouciant works on paper, it is a carefully modulated and truly 
    impressive show.
For may years now, Hopkins has 
    worked with materials that already bear images, meticulously 
    painting over and around patterned furnishing textiles, printed 
    maps, photographs and magazine pages. Her elegant exposure of the 
    tension and ambiguity between the printed image and the hand-made 
    mark is a rejection of expressive traditions in painting but is 
    accompanied by an understated yet often emotional undertow. What 
    does it mean when the map of Europe is altered to obliterate the 
    sea between us and mainland Europe? Or when all the oceans appear 
    to run dry? Hopkins finds freedom in discipline, setting systematic 
    tasks like marking in pencil the crumples in a blank sheet, or 
    turning florid chintz into a discomfiting mass of black marks. 
    Three glass vitrines of tiny new works on paper are a delight, each 
    displaying small sewn books that show the pleasures of simple 
    abstract pattern, the ability to lose oneself in a task without 
    losing control becomes the potential to share without power or 
    presumption.
At the Talbot Rice Gallery, the lively, clever group show 
    Counterpoint is also part of the Generation programme, an 
    exhibition that is perhaps denser and less immediately shouty than 
    some of its more colourful cohorts with a welcome emphasis on 
    performance and events throughout its programme and a selection of 
    artists at either end of the career trajectory. While one does 
    instinctually long for some kind of argument or theme Counterpoint 
    resists both thematic or chronological grouping featuring artists 
    as estimable and as diverse as Ross Birrell, Keith Farquhar and a 
    diamanté-clad Michelle Hannah, whose music video performance as 
    perhaps a female Bowie or acid-blonde Grace Jones transforms the 
    adjacent Playfair Library into a laser-lit playground. Hannah’s 
    performance is a deadpan yet seductive recasting of our ambiguous 
    love affair with the future, a gorgeous retro-tinged reimagining of 
    the past.
In the Georgian Gallery Keith Farquhar revisits a work he first 
    made some 21 years ago, two aluminium street lamps lying prone and 
    vulnerable yet still lit on the gallery floor. Adjacent is the work 
    by Ellie Harrison that has captured the headlines and the 
    imagination of visitors to the Edinburgh Art Festival: a row of 
    confetti cannons that will be activated in the gallery if there is 
    a Yes vote, spreading cheer and disorder amongst the art works 
    nearby.
Whether it’s straightforward as a celebratory gesture is not 
    quite clear. The work’s title After the Revolution Who will Clear 
    up the Mess? is drawn from a feminist slogan that refers to the 
    difference between rhetoric and the real, hard work of politics. 
    Ironically if it’s a yes vote then Harrison’s work will have been 
    spent; it is in the event of a no that the irony of potential and 
    potentially explosive possibility would make it a truly poignant 
    museum piece. The artist is inviting people to apply for tickets to 
    a referendum party and to await the fate of both the nation and her 
    artwork. It’s up to all of us now to decide whether we wish the 
    guns to remain stilled.
