Glasgow to harness power of art for renewable 
    energy
 Dundas Dandelion will generate electric 
    charges as it sways in the wind and create a striking focal point 
    for the city. Picture: Contributed
They are brave, bold and perhaps even beautiful and 
    are set to transform an unloved Glasgow site with a radical new 
    class of public art that can quietly and cleanly produce green 
    energy for hundreds of homes.
Three designs have been shortlisted for The Land Art Generator 
    Initiative which has come to Glasgow following success in Dubai, 
    Copenhagen and New York in creating renewable energy projects for 
    urban spaces.
 Wind Forest is a 'futuristic
     'forest' of 100 
    oscillating windturbines that will rotate and move in the breeze. 
    Picture: Contributed
One design will be developed on the Port Dundas regeneration 
    site in the north of Glasgow to both provide a striking community 
    focal point as well as a source of green electricity for the new 
    community.
Teams of architects, designers and engineers have worked 
    together to combine the latest renewables technology with a 
    high-aesthetic approach. Chris Fremantle, curator of the LAGI in 
    Glasgow, said he had been “thrilled” with the shortlisted projects, 
    drawn from 12 entries, which will go on show at the Lighthouse in 
    Glasgow from 9 June.
He said: “I think we are incredibly excited about how all 
    the teams have worked so effectively together to produce such 
    fabulous results.”
“They have all taken on the idea that it isn’t just a 
    problem of creating a beautiful object but that it needs to be 
    something that engages people who are going to live on the site. 
    “All these projects look at how we can do something now to create a 
    positive relationship between energy and sustainability in the 
    future.”
Wind Forest is one of the three shortlisted projects and is a 
    collaboration of architects Peter Richardson of ZM Architecture; 
    Matthew Dalziel and Louise Scullion of Dalziel + Scullion, Ian 
    Nicoll of Qmulus Ltd and Peter Yeadon of Yeadon Space Agency.
It is a “futuristic forest” of 100 4kW single wind turbines 
    which have no blades but work through oscillation. The turbines 
    will generate electricity through the swaying motion of the 
    13-metre-high structures.
The second project, Watergaw, promises to create a section of 
    rainbow over the north Glasgow skyline once it has produced 1,000kW 
    of electricity. This will be done through a clean energy production 
    network which includes a hydro scheme at the Pinkston Basin on the 
    Monkland Canal.
 Watergaw will create a rainbow over 
    north Glasgow when power from a network of renewable devices 
    produces 1000 kWh of electricity.
The project has been devised by ERZ Studio architects Riccardo 
    Mariano and Alec Finlay, who has just unveiled a major piece at 
    Jupiter Artland, plus a team of civil and structural engineers and 
    ecology consultants.
The Dundas Dandelion is a collaboration between Stallan-Brand 
    Architectural Design, Pidgin Perfect and Glasgow Science Festival, 
    amongst others. It uses an arrangement of flexible carbon fibre 
    “wind stalks” containing discs that generate electric charges as 
    they sway in the wind.
The shortlisted projects were selected by the Canal Regeneration 
    Partnership, which will choose the one that will move forward into 
    the development stage with funding sources as yet to be identified 
    to be sought for the project.
Councillor George Redmond, Executive Member for Jobs, Business 
    and Investment at Glasgow City Council, said: “The 
    regeneration of the canal in Glasgow offers the opportunity to look 
    at achieving our aims for the area in new ways, and the fantastic 
    designs on show at this exhibition will illustrate what could be 
    done by local talent as we continue the renaissance of the canal 
    banks.”

