The life of Mary, Queen of Scots 
 Mary, Queen of Scots was beheaded on 
    this day over 500 years ago.
On this day in 1587, Mary, Queen of Scots was executed 
    for treason in Northamptonshire. We look at the life and times of 
    Scotland’s first female leader. 
A large crowd of more than two hundred people had gathered at 
    Fotheringay Castle to watch the execution scheduled for the day. 
    
But as the lady on the block spoke her prayers in Latin, it was 
    clear that the large crowds were for no normal execution. 
Imprisoned for corresponding with known plotter Anthony 
    Babbington - a fellow Catholic aiming to overthrow Mary’s cousin, 
    Queen Elizabeth - it took three strikes to successfully sever 
    Mary’s head. 
Mary Stuart’s demise as the Queen of Scotland brought an end to 
    years of suspicion on the part of her cousin. The only surviving 
    child of James V, Mary I of Scotland acceded to the throne at just 
    six days old on the death of her father, James V of Scotland. 
Her French mother, Mary of Guise, acted as Regent on her young 
    daughter’s behalf. In April 1558, Mary married Francis - the heir 
    to the French crowd - before he became king in 1559. The uniting of 
    the French and Scottish crowns, much to the chagrin of England, was 
    broken in 1559 by the death of Francis due to an ear infection. 
Mary returned to Scotland aged 18 and immediately encountered 
    difficulties as a Catholic in a Protestant nation. 
Married again seven years later to Lord Darnley, their 
    relationship suffered under the accusations of infidelity. The Earl 
    of Darnley died in suspicious circumstances in February 1567, and 
    Mary progressed onto her third marriage a mere three months later 
    with her new son James. 
Marriage to the main suspect in Darnley’s murder drove a wedge 
    between her and Scottish leaders. Bothwell was exiled and Mary 
    abdicated her throne in July 1567, before being imprisoned in 
    Lochleven Castle in Kinross-shire. 
After escaping her imprisonment a year later, Mary made her way 
    to England in the hopes of securing shelter from her cousin, 
    Elizabeth I. 
Here, she was imprisoned and surveilled for nearly two decades. 
    Mary became the focus of many Catholic plots to depose Elizabeth, 
    but was spared because she had not acted in any of them. 
This all changed in 1586, as Mary wrote letters to Anthony 
    Babington who was planning to depose Elizabeth. 
With this incriminating evidence against her, Mary was tried for 
    treason and sentenced to execution in October 1586. She was 
    executed at the age of 44 on 8 February 1587, with son James 
    succeeding Elizabeth in 1603. 
