Map: Scotland key battle sites throughout the 
    ages

Scotland's protected battlegrounds. Picture: TSPL
Over the centuries Scotland’s landscape has been home to a 
    plethora of bloody battles that have played a major part in shaping 
    our nation.
Today, across the country, there are 39 protected battlegrounds 
    which act as a reminder to some of the most violent days in 
    Scottish history.

Memorial at Culloden. Picture: Jan Holm/Shutterstock
We’ve mapped out the 39 
    battles sites protected by Historic Environment Scotland 
    that mark some of the most significant moments in Scottish 
    history.
1. Alford (1645): The Battle of Alford was 
    fought between Scottish Royalists and the Covenanter Government 
    forces during the Wars of the Three Kingdoms. It ended in victory 
    for Montrose and allowed the Royalist army to progress into the 
    lowlands, belittling the power of the Covenanter army.
2. Ancrum Moor (1545): The Battle of Ancrum 
    Moor was part of a campaign by Henry VIII, waged to force Scots to 
    accept the marriage between his son Edward and the infant Mary, 
    Queen of Scots. During their raid on the Borders, the English army 
    was attacked by Scottish forces at the Moor where they were 
    defeated and suffered heavy losses.

Map of Scotland's protected battlegrounds. Picture: TSPL
3. Auldearn (1645): Auldearn was the first 
    time Marquis of Montrose’s Royalist forces came into contact with 
    an experienced Covenanter army. Despite being outnumbered, Montrose 
    was able to inflict a heavy defeat in what is often thought as his 
    greatest victory.
4. Bannockburn (1314): Bannockburn is one 
    of most famous battles in Scottish history and was a key battle in 
    Scottish Wars of Independence. It gave Robert the Bruce control of 
    Scotland and removed English forces from the country.
5. Barra (1308): The Battle of Barra marked 
    the end of the opposition to King Robert I (the Bruce) in 
    Scotland.
6. Blar-da-Leine (1544): Blar-da-Leine also 
    known as the Battle of the Shirts was fought between rival clans 
    over a dispute in leadership of Clanranald, one of the most 
    powerful branches of Clan Donald. The battle was won by the 
    MacDonalds but the number of dead and injured remains unknown.
7. Bothwell Bridge (1679): The Battle of 
    Bothwell Bridge brought to an end the 1679 Covenanter rebellion - 
    one of the largest of Covenanter uprisings of the 17th century. It 
    marked the final battle between them and their Government 
    opponents.
8. Carbisdale (1650): Carbisdale was the 
    last battle fought by Marquis of Montrose, in support of the 
    Royalist cause. The scenes marked the end of internal struggles 
    within Scotland and led to Montrose being apprehended and executed 
    by the Covenanters.
9. Cromdale (1690): Cromdale was the final 
    battle during the first Jacobite Rising within Scotland and brought 
    the first attempt to restore James VII to an end. The site was also 
    the location for the final major battle within Scotland in 
    1600s.
10. Culloden (1746): Another of Scotland’s 
    famous battles, Culloden was the last battle of the Jacobite 
    Rising. The battle saw the Jacobites defeated, marking the end of a 
    sixty year struggle.
11. Drumclog (1679): Drumclog was the 
    location of the opening battle of the 1679 Covenanter uprising 
    which resulted in a victory for the Covenanters which largely 
    benefited their cause and gained them more recruits.
12. Dunbar I (1296): Dunbar was the 
    the site of the first major battle 
    in the First Scottish War of Independence. It was won by the 
    English and destroyed the opposition within Scotland to Edward I 
    for a time.
13. Dunbar II (1650): The second battle of 
    Dunbar was one of the largest and bloodiest in Scottish history. It 
    is also regarded as the most influential battle fought during the 
    Wars of the Three Kingdoms with significant military and political 
    consequences.
14. Dunkeld (1689): Fought between 
    Government troops and the Jacobites, Dunkeld was a defining moment 
    in Scottish history. Much of the town was destroyed during the 
    battle, eventually the Jacobites withdrew and were unable to 
    advance through Perth and Stirling.
15. Dupplin Moor (1322): The Battle of 
    Dupplin Moor was the first battle in the Second War of Scottish 
    Independence and ended in a heavy defeat for the Scottish army and 
    left the country effectively leaderless.
16. Falkirk II (1746): Another battle waged 
    during the Jacobite Risings, the second battle of Falkirk was the 
    penultimate challenge in the risings. The Jacobite army was led by 
    Bonnie Prince Charlie and ended up gaining victory.
17. Fycie (1645): Fyvie was another of 
    Montrose’s victories on behalf of the Royalist cause.
18. Glen Livet (1594): The Battle of 
    Glenlivet was an important moment in the struggles between 
    Presbyterians and Catholics within the country. It was the first 
    time in the Highlands that artillery was used on the 
    battlefield.
19. Glenshiel (1719): Glenshiel was the 
    only battle fought during the 1719 Jacobite Rising and saw the use 
    of Spanish support. Field fortifications still remain, which is 
    rare in Scotland.
20. Harlaw (1411): The Battle of Harlaw is 
    known as one of the bloodiest medieval battles in Scotland’s 
    history. It saw both the MacDonald army and the Earl of Mar suffer 
    heavy losses despite being militarily inconclusive.
21. Inverkeithing II (1651): The second 
    battle of Inverkeithing marked the end of the conflict known as the 
    Wars of the Three Kingdoms and brought the country under the 
    control of the Protectorate of Oliver Cromwell.
22. Inverlochy I (1431): The first Battle 
    of Inverlochy was the first in the struggles between the Scottish 
    monarchy and the Lords of the Isles and was the result of years of 
    effort by King James I to take full control of the Highlands.
23. Inverlochy II (1645): The second battle 
    resulted in one of Montrose’s most iconic victories and saw a 
    number of new recruits join his cause.
24. Killiecrankie (1689): The Battle of 
    Killiecrankie was the initial battle in what would become the first 
    Jacobite Rising.
25. Kilsyth (1645): During the Civil Wars, 
    Kilsyth saw Montrose destroy the last of Covenanter army in 
    Scotland in an unusually enclosed landscape. It gave the Royalists 
    short lived military control of the country.
26. Langside (1568): Before Mary, Queen of 
    Scots fled to England where she was imprisoned and killed, the 
    Battle of Langside took place. Opposing Mary’s army was the Earl of 
    Moray who secured victory and ended her attempts to retake the 
    throne.
27. Linlithgow Bridge (1526): The Battle of 
    Linlithgow Bridge was in aid of freeing James V from the control of 
    the Earl of Angus. The attempt was unsuccessful. It would be 
    another two years until James was free.
28. Loudoun Hill (1307): One of the first 
    victories of King Robert I (the Bruce) was taken at Loudoun Hill 
    against the English forces. The win aided the strength of his 
    position in Scotland.
29. Mulroy (1688): Known as the last clan 
    battle, the Battle of Mulroy was followed by a drastic change in 
    the nature of clan life and warfare in the Highlands. Two clans, 
    the MacDonalds of Keppoch and the army of Lachlan Mackintosh, 
    fought against each other with the help of their allies.
30. Philiphaugh (1645): During Montrose’s 
    Royalist campaign, his only defeat took place in Philiphaugh. 
    Philiphaugh marginalised Montrose’s army and signalled the end of 
    his campaign in Scotland.
31. Pinkie (1547): The Battle of Pinkie was 
    another result of Henry VII’s campaign to get Scots to accept the 
    marriage between his son and Mary, Queen of Scots.
32. Prestonpans (1745): The Battle of 
    Prestonpans was the opening battle of the 1745 Jacobite Rising, and 
    resulted in their victory. It left them with control of Scotland 
    and the army effectively destroyed.
33. Roslin (1303): One of the biggest 
    battles of the First Scottish War of Independence was the Battle 
    Roslin. It ended in victory for the Scottish.
34. Rullion Green (1666): Rullion Green was 
    the site of the only battle of the 1666 Covenanter rebellion. The 
    uprising was ended after they were defeated.
35. Sauchieburn (1488): The battle at 
    Sauchieburn was the confrontation between disaffected Scottish 
    nobles who were acting against James III. After meeting in 
    Stirling, the rebels secured a victory which resulted in a new King 
    coming to the throne of Scotland.
36. Sheriffmuir (1715): The Battle of 
    Sheriffmuir took place during the 1715 Jacobite Rising, and 
    involved one of the largest Jacobite armies ever fielded in 
    Scotland.
37. Skirmish Hill (1526): The Skirmish Hill 
    was fought between the Tweed and Darnick Tower almost 500 years 
    ago, Archibald Douglas, Earl of Angus, was challenged by Walter 
    Scott of Buccleuch over the custody of the 14-year-old King James V 
    in July 1526.
38. Stirling Bridge (1297): The Battle of 
    Stirling Bridge is one of the most notorious Scottish battles and 
    victories in the Wars of Independence. The battle led to the 
    appointment of William Wallace as Guardian of the Realm of 
    Scotland.
39. Tippermuir (1644): The Battle of 
    Tippermuir was the first victory for Montrose which saw him take 
    succeed over a much larger and better equiped Covenater army.

