EARLIEST KNOWN MONKS IN BRITISH ISLES UNCOVERED IN 
    SOMERSET
Archaeological excavations have uncovered the earliest known 
    monks in the British Isles, experts have said.
Radiocarbon dating of bodies in a monastic cemetery in Somerset, 
    by archaeologists re-investigating the site of a medieval chapel 
    linked to the legends of King Arthur, has revealed the earliest 
    monks died in the 5th or 6th centuries AD.
It shows that the monastery began before Somerset was conquered 
    by the Saxon kings of Wessex in the 7th century and provides the 
    earliest known evidence of monasticism in the British Isles, the 
    South West Heritage Trust said
The excavation, run as a community training dig by the Trust, 
    re-investigated the medieval chapel site which was previously 
    excavated in the 1880s and again in the 1960s, when an extensive 
    cemetery of at least 50 people was uncovered.
Almost all the bodies were adult males, which experts said left 
    little doubt that it was a monastic graveyard.
The bodies of two juveniles may have been novices, while the one 
    woman's body may have been a patron or visiting nun.
In the latest dig, funded with a £1.8 million Heritage Lottery 
    Fund (HLF) grant, some skeletons were uncovered to allow 
    radiocarbon dating, with samples taken from six individuals in 
    graves and one leg bone found in the backfill of the 1960s dig.
The earliest monk died between 406 AD and 544 AD, with burials 
    continuing in the 7th to early 9th centuries, the tests found.
Archaeologists said the monastic use of the site, a small island 
    in the Avalon Marshes, may have ended in the later 9th century when 
    Somerset was attacked by Viking armies.
The chapel at Beckery, whose place name either means 
    Bee-keeper's Island in old English or Little Ireland in Irish, 
    is connected to legendary visits by King Arthur, who is said to 
    have seen a vision of Mary Magdalene and the baby Jesus there.
The Irish Saint Bridget also reputedly visited it in AD 488 and 
    left some possessions at the site, which later became a place of 
    pilgrimage.
Site director Richard Brunning from the South West Heritage 
    Trust said: "It is great to show that a community 
    excavation can produce results that revolutionise our view of the 
    origins of monasticism in Britain and Ireland.
"Archaeology is providing evidence that can get us 
    beyond the uncertainty of the historical sources.
"The ancient origins of the Beckery site may explain 
    why later medieval writers linked it to figures such as King Arthur 
    and Saint Bridget."
Nerys Watts, Head of HLF South West, said: "This 
    discovery just goes to show the incredible hidden heritage and 
    untold stories still to be discovered within our 
    landscapes."
