Iron age man gets his teeth into his work
 
A man who died almost two thousand years ago in Orkney appears 
    to have lost all but two of his teeth because he employed his mouth 
    in every day work, archaeologists believe.
New radiocarbon dating data and a dietary assessment of human 
    remains discovered at The Cairns, an Iron Age broch site under 
    excavation on the island of South Ronaldsay, have given new 
    insights into the individual. He may have been the last occupant of 
    the broch ( drystane hollow-walled home).
In July excavations unearthed a human jaw placed in a very 
    large, carved whalebone vessel. It is thought contemporaries of 
    this man had placed the bone in the vessel when they 
    de-commissioned the broch itself, probably just after his death.
The vessel was resting against the outer wall-face of the broch 
    near to its main entrance. Also present within the whalebone 
    container were remains of three new-born lambs, and other animal 
    bones. There were also deer antlers. Archaeologists think he may 
    have been an important man given the ritualistic style of his 
    burial among animal remains in the broch.
The new radiocarbon dates show that the man died sometime 
    between AD120 and AD240 in the latter part of what is 
    conventionally termed the Scottish Atlantic Middle Iron Age.
The study suggests that the jaw belongs to a man of some 
    considerable age 50 at least, but he may well have been several 
    decades older than that.
According to The University of the Highlands and Islands (UHI) 
    Archaeology Institute, which has been leading the digs and studies 
    of a broch:
"The individual seems to have led an active working 
    life judging by the condition of the teeth - only two were left! 
    The jawbone had grown over most of the sockets of the missing teeth 
    showing that these teeth had been lost during life. This tooth loss 
    may have been brought about partly through the individual using his 
    mouth in the manner of a third hand, to tightly clamp materials, 
    such as grasses and straw, whilst working on them with his hands, 
    perhaps in making plant-fibre items such as bags and 
    containers."
Martin Carruthers, UHI Site Director, said: "It may 
    not be pushing this line of consideration too far to suggest the 
    possibility that it was his death that occasioned the final 
    abandonment and decommissioning of the broch. There are plenty of 
    examples from different cultures around the world, where the death 
    of an important person, who had a significant association with a 
    particular house, resulted in the end of that entire house as 
    well."
