The evil Scots expats who left their bloody mark on 
    America

The United States Department of Veterans Affairs – VA, as 
    it's known – is a colossal organisation dedicated to the 
    welfare of veterans and their families. Its budget for 2017 is $180 
    billion – around £141bn. Congress established the Veterans Bureau 
    in 1921, combining three federal agencies. Warren Harding, the new 
    president, installed an old friend, Charles Forbes, as its head.
But Forbes was the wrong man for the job. He and his hangers-on 
    bled the bureau dry on an industrial level. Eventually, he was 
    charged with conspiring to defraud the US government and jailed for 
    two years but not before a furious Harding had gripped him by the 
    throat and screamed: "You yellow rat! You 
    double-crossing bastard."
Forbes is part of the dark gallery of expat Scots – crooks, 
    conmen, murderers – in a book by Iain Lundy, himself an expat in 
    the US, a former journalist at The Herald's sister paper, the 
    Evening Times. The book is called Between Daylight and Hell: Scots 
    Who Left a Stain on American History.
In his introduction Lundy writes that Scots have done everything 
    in the US. One man helped build the Statue of Liberty, another 
    saved the buffalo from extinction. In addition, the ranks of 
    celebrated Scots include the Dunfermline-born industrialist Andrew 
    Carnegie, and John Muir, the man from Dunbar who became the father 
    of the modern conservation movement.
At the opposite end of the scale was Forbes, slippery as an eel 
    and possessed of few redeeming qualities. He was, says Lundy, 
    "a shyster and a conman, a swindler and a two-bit 
    huckster, a playboy and a cheating womaniser, an army deserter and 
    a jailbird".
Forbes was born in 1877, in Glenluce, Wigtownshire. By 1900 the 
    Forbes family was listed in the US Census as living in 
    Massachusetts. Forbes enjoyed an expensive education, at the 
    Massachusetts Institute of Technology among other places.
He joined the army and served in the Philippines, and afterwards 
    became a civil engineer and a well-known figure in Democratic Party 
    circles. He helped expand the US naval station at Pearl Harbor, and 
    it was in Hawaii that he became firm friends with Harding, then a 
    senator.
During the Great War he saw service in France as a signalman 
    with the 33rd Infantry Division, American Expeditionary Forces. He 
    ended up as a lieutenant-colonel and earned both the Distinguished 
    Service Medal and the Croix de Guerre.
Harding became president in 1921 and when it came to appointing 
    the first head of the Veterans Bureau, he looked no further than 
    his old friend Forbes, who was already running the War Risk 
    Insurance Bureau, one of the agencies that were merged to form the 
    bureau. This was one of the many examples of cronyism that tainted 
    Harding's administration.
Forbes established a network of 14 regional Veterans Bureau 
    offices and put many old friends in charge of the 30,000 employees. 
    Some travelled from coast to coast ostensibly in search of possible 
    sites for new hospitals but instead staged drunken parties at 
    public expense.
What followed was, as one historian put it, tantamount to Forbes 
    establishing an "opportunistic patchwork of individual 
    bribery and greed". According to Lundy, Forbes 
    "was up to his neck in dizzying levels of corruption, 
    promising private construction firms land and building contracts in 
    exchange for kickbacks worth thousands of dollars ... Heavy 
    drinking parties, all on Bureau expenses, became the norm. Forbes 
    even boasted that he would soon be promoted to the president’s 
    cabinet where more ‘opportunities’ would present 
    themselves."
In 1922 Forbes received $5,000 in cash from a construction boss, 
    who then received hospital contracts. Forbes in turn received 
    thousands of dollars plus a percentage of the company’s profits on 
    the deal. He also sold nearly $7m of surplus medical equipment to 
    private interests for $600,000.
While all of this was going on, the veterans – the very people 
    the bureau was designed to help – were virtually ignored. More than 
    300,000 US soldiers had been wounded in combat during the First 
    World War but only 47,000 of them had their claims for disability 
    insurance approved. Thousands had their applications rejected. 
    Forbes had even failed to open 200,000 pieces of veterans' 
    mail received by his office. As a newspaper columnist later wrote, 
    "Congress little realizes that its creature, the 
    Veterans Bureau, has probably made wrecks of more men since the war 
    than the war itself took in dead and maimed."
But Forbes failed to cover his tracks, and he had made too many 
    enemies for his spree to last. Harding at last got wise to his 
    friend's misdeeds, and Forbes resigned on February 15, 1923. 
    Harding, whose time in office had been dogged by scandal, died that 
    August, three years before his 60th birthday.
Forbes served one year and eight months of his jail sentence. He 
    died in 1952. Despite having callously ignored the pleadings of 
    thousands of veterans, and pocketing money earmarked for their 
    recuperation, he was granted a burial plot at Arlington National 
    Cemetery, the most hallowed ground in the United States.
The recent presidential battle between Donald Trump and Hillary 
    Clinton was unedifying in so many ways, largely to Trump's 
    inflammatory rhetoric – but it was child's play compared with 
    the contest that took place in 1800 between John Adams, the 
    Federalist incumbent, and his Republican challenger, Vice-President 
    Thomas Jefferson.
It was a campaign of bitter mudslinging but it plumbed a new 
    depth when one anonymously-written pamphlet, The Prospect Before 
    Us, asserted that Adams was not merely "mentally 
    deranged" but also "a hideous hermaphroditical 
    character who has neither the force and firmness of a man nor the 
    gentleness and sensibility of a woman".
This understandably enraged Adams and his wife, Abigail. The 
    president reached for his highly controversial Sedition Act in 
    order to punish the author, a political pamphleteer and journalist 
    by the name of James Thomson Callender. Callender – 
    "Jefferson’s personal attack dog, the future 
    president’s ‘hired pen’", says Lundy – was convicted 
    of sedition and jailed for nine months. Jefferson, however, won the 
    presidential election, and his first act was to pardon and release 
    Callender and a number of other writers who had suffered the same 
    fate.
Callender was born in 1758 and spent his childhood in Edinburgh, 
    Stirling or the Borders. He made his name in his native land with 
    pamphlets that savaged Samuel Johnson, the Excise Service and 
    Britain's empire building, before setting sail for America in 
    1793.
This was a boom decade for newspapers and political pamphlets in 
    the States. There were publications in every city, town and 
    village, and readership numbers exploded. Editors, buoyed by the 
    freedom of speech clause in the US Constitution’s First Amendment, 
    were fearless, and began printing opinions in sensational terms.
Callender flourished in such an atmosphere. He wrote an article 
    attacking the revered George Washington, and in a 1797 pamphlet he 
    sensationally revealed the sexual relationship between Alexander 
    Hamilton, another of the key Founding Fathers, and a married woman, 
    and the blackmail that had resulted.
Bankrolled by Jefferson, he became editor of the Richmond 
    Examiner, a Virginia newspaper, turning it into a Republican 
    scandal-sheet and maintaining his fierce anti-Adams rhetoric. But 
    he later turned against Jefferson, and claimed in 1802 that 
    Jefferson had fathered children with his slave, Sally Hemings. It 
    was an allegation that a later historian would describe as 
    Callender’s "literary weapon of mass destruction 
    against the president".
Virginia society closed ranks against Callender, and even his 
    Federalist newspaper allies distanced themselves. In 1803 he was 
    jailed a second time. Ten days after his release, he was seen in a 
    state of extreme intoxication in the streets of Richmond. The 
    following day his body was recovered from the James River. Some 
    said he had fallen into three feet of water and been too drunk to 
    get back up. Others suggested he had committed suicide.
Concludes Lundy: "The Founding Fathers Callender 
    vilified wrote a nation’s Constitution that is followed more than 
    300 years later. Every American can quote from it. The bitter 
    vitriol that spilled from Callender’s pen has largely faded into 
    obscurity. Yet the trash journalism that he perfected 
    persists."
Of William Cameron Stewart it was once said that "he 
    seemed to be filled with an insane desire to slaughter as many as 
    possible, and he hewed them down without the least 
    mercy." The fact that Stewart, a Scot, was a Mormon, 
    and that the words were uttered by a fellow member of the church, 
    is just one of the arresting facts of his story.
Stewart, who spent part of his childhood in Lochaber, became a 
    Mormon convert and in 1853 he sailed from Liverpool to New Orleans 
    then headed for Iowa. There, he joined tens of thousands of Mormon 
    pioneers on their long westward trek.
In September 1857 a notorious massacre took place at Mountain 
    Meadows, in southern Utah. Lundy writes: "At least 120 
    emigrants on a west-bound wagon train were lured to their deaths by 
    members of a Mormon militia. These members were armed to the teeth, 
    and many had their faces painted to make them look like 
    Indians.
"[Stewart's] actions during the killing were 
    animalistic in their brutality. He went on a sadistic and feral 
    rampage that stands comparison with any American outlaw. Stewart 
    showed his victims not a single ounce of mercy, even as they 
    pleaded for their lives. Of all those who participated in the 
    butchering of the defenceless homesteaders, multiple witnesses 
    described him as the most bloodthirsty."
Behind the mass killings lay a grim blend of hysteria, revenge, 
    hatred and fear born out of the belief that the Church of 
    Latter-Day Saints, an institution that was only 27 years old at 
    this time, was under attack from mainstream America. Lundy's 
    book chronicles the birth of the church in 1830, and the fact 
    America "was quite simply not ready to embrace such a 
    profound alternative to its long-standing spiritual 
    beliefs". In Missouri, the church was persecuted but 
    armed Mormons retaliated. Seventeen Mormons were killed by a 
    militia unit after the state's governor ordered that Mormons 
    be "exterminated or driven from the 
    state". After considerable further bloodshed the 
    Mormons trekked 1,200 miles to set up home in Utah's Great 
    Salt Basin.
By 1857, however, Arkansas, Missouri, Illinois and Ohio all 
    featured on the Mormon tablet of revenge: woe betide anyone from 
    these states who dared cross Mormon territory. Other factors 
    contributed to the massacre. There was a siege mentality among the 
    church community. President James Buchanan ordered the army to 
    march on Utah in response to the hostility his officials were 
    receiving.
The wagon-train of emigrants happened to come from north-west 
    Arkansas, one of the "enemy" states. Rumours were spread. 
    The atmosphere became fevered. The emigrants were not to know they 
    were heading to their deaths.
Members of the Paiute tribe began the massacre but suffered 
    numerous losses, and many of the survivors found they no longer had 
    an appetite for bloodshed. Without hesitation, the Mormon civic, 
    religious and military leaders in Cedar City decided to finish 
    matters. With a small band of Paiute still onside by Friday, 
    September 11, a number of Mormons readied for the action, with 
    their faces painted like tribesmen's.
The elimination plan, says Lundy, was cool, clinical, brutal and 
    stomach-churning in its savagery. The Mormons were to promise the 
    emigrants safe passage through the Meadows then, at a given signal, 
    kill every man, woman and child, except those too young to 
    remember.
The book details the massacre, and Stewart's relentlessly 
    grim role. "It was a well-orchestrated and calculated 
    slaughter perpetrated by armed militia men. Almost 70 individuals 
    have been identified as participants. The atrocity at Mountain 
    Meadows was the work of an entire Mormon community; everyone knew 
    what had happened and everyone knew who had been 
    involved.
"Yet to the eternal shame of the Mormon Church 
    hierarchy, it tried to hush up the macabre events of that day. It 
    attempted to blame the Paiute tribe and then spent many years in 
    various stages of denial."
In an article on the church's website, Richard E Turley 
    Jr., managing director of the Family and Church History Department, 
    writes: "Over the preceding years, disagreements, 
    miscommunication, prejudices and political wrangling on both sides 
    had created a growing divide between the territory and the federal 
    government. In retrospect it is easy to see that both groups 
    overreacted – the government sent an army to put down perceived 
    treason in Utah, and the Saints believed the army was coming to 
    oppress, drive or even destroy them."
Stewart himself became a fugitive. He expressed a desire to 
    return to Scotland "and perhaps do a little good 
    there", but he ended up hiding out in Arizona before 
    fleeing to a Mormon colony in Mexico. Only one man, John D Lee, was 
    tried for his part in the massacre. He was made something of a 
    scapegoat, and in 1877 he was taken to Mountain Meadows, where he 
    was executed by firing squad. As for Stewart, he breathed his last 
    in Mexico in 1895, almost four decades after the merciless killing 
    of the men, women and children of the wagon-train. 
