The first and largest open education initiative in the UK was 
    the UKOER Programme. Between 2009 and 2012 the Higher Education 
    Funding Council for England (HEFCE) invested over £10 million in 
    UKOER, and funded over 80 projects at universities throughout 
    England. UKOER proved to be hugely successful, however only English 
    universities were eligible to bid for funding. As a result, there 
    was arguably less awareness of the potential benefits of open 
    education across other sectors of UK education. That is not to say 
    there have been no significant open education developments in other 
    parts of the UK, simply that approaches to open education have 
    followed different paths.
In September 2013 universities in Wales issued the Wales Open 
    Education Declaration of Intent, which announced Welsh 
    Universities 
    commitment to work towards the principals of open education and in 
    direct response, the OER Cymru project was established. In a 
    parallel initiative, the Welsh Government established an Open 
    Digital Learning Working Group in early 2013, which published the 
    report Open and Online: Wales, higher education and emerging modes 
    of learning.
Meanwhile north of the border, interest was growing around the 
    area of Open Badges, and MOOCs had also caught the attention of 
    Scottish Higher Education.
In order to raise awareness of open education policy and 
    practice more widely, Cetis, SQA, Jisc RSC Scotland and the ALT 
    Scotland SIG, came together to launch Open Scotland in early 2013. 
    Open Scotland is an unfunded cross-sector initiative that aims to 
    raise awareness of open education, encourage the sharing of open 
    educational resources, and explore the potential of open policy and 
    practice to benefit all sectors of Scottish education. Among other 
    activities, Open Scotland launched the Scottish Open Education 
    Declaration, based on the UNESCO Paris OER Declaration.
Open education in general, and 
    MOOCS in particular, also caught the attention of the 
    Scottish Government and the Scottish Funding Council, and in early 
    2014 the Funding Council announced a £1.3 million investment in 
    open education. Rather than issue an open funding call similar to 
    the UKOER programme, SFC allocated their funding to the Open 
    University to establish the Opening Education Practices in Scotland 
    (OEPS) project, which aims to facilitate best practice in open 
    education in Scotland.
These diverse programmes represent just some of the open 
    education initiatives that have emerged in the UK; they provide a 
    wide range of exemplars that may be of interest and benefit to open 
    education practitioners in Germany and elsewhere in Europe.
