The history of Scotland’s ‘dry’ temperance towns 
 A typical Temperance Movement poster
IT MAY seem surprising to some today, but at one point 
    booze was banned across many towns in Scotland.
Kilsyth, Kirkintilloch, Wick and Lerwick were amongst those 
    turned dry after local vetoes were held following the passing of 
    the 1913 Temperance Act.
 A meeting of the Women's Committee 
    on Social Service, Temperance and Moral Welfare held at St 
    Cuthberts church in Edinburgh in May 1964.
A further 35 ballots led to limits on alcohol sales. 
While voters were hesitant to enforce wholesale changes on the 
    nation’s habits, the hangover from the days that the Temperance 
    Movement bore both social and political influence lingered long in 
    some parts.
Kilmacolm in Inverclyde, for example, did not have a pub until 
    1998 when an old waiting room at the train station was converted 
    into The Pullman.
People travelled to enjoy the grand opening, which brought an 
    end to more than 70 years of “dry” Kilmalcolm.
 A typical Temperance Movement 
    poster.
It was a period that saw the village’s Buchan Arms Hotel shut 
    down and taken over by the parish, which turned it into a community 
    centre.
The ban also led to hardships at the former Hydropathic Hotel, 
    which also closed it doors as a new, sober social mood took 
    hold.
Before the veto, there had been a slow but powerful movement 
    building in Scotland against alcohol, which was linked to just 
    about ever social pain in Scotland - from loutishness and poverty 
    to crime and domestic violence.
The temperance movement in Scotland began in earnest around 1830 
    inspired by the prohibition movement of the United States.
 Temperance Movement propoganda in the 
    run up to Edinbugh vote on alcohol ban
Originally it focussed on reducing consumption of strong or 
    “ardent” spirits with campaigners finding a natural home in 
    Glasgow, a city whose population was bulging due to its heavy 
    industrial activity.
Paisley, Greenock and the mining towns of Lanarkshire and 
    Ayrshire also becoming a focus for temperance campaigning.
The movement moved to a harder message in 1844 when the Scottish 
    Temperance League was formed in Falkirk, with total abstinence 
    preached.
League members pledged themselves to abstain from all 
    intoxicating beverages, not simply ardent spirits, in a promise 
    dubbed “the long pledge.”
It came amid growing concern of the effects of alcohol on 
    safety, family life and society.
Jack S Blocker, in Alcohol and Temperance in Modern History, 
    notes that a parliamentary report on drink-related arrests between 
    1831 and 1851, it found “Glasgow was three times more 
    drunken than Edinburgh and five times more drunk than 
    London.”
He also noted that Scots “like the Irish and unlike the 
    English and Welsh, ordinary people drank a great deal of 
    whisky.”
Around this time in Glasgow, there was one liquor outlet for 
    every 150 people, supplemented by the illegal shabeens that served 
    up a mixture of whisky and meths.
As the Temperance Movement - a myriad of organisations rooted in 
    Christianity, Charitism, Socialism and Women’s Suffrage - gathered 
    momentum, new members would be urged to make a public pledge to 
    abstinence in a church or temperance meeting.
There was, of course, naming and shaming of those who broke 
    their promise.
While public houses closed as the abstinence message spread, new 
    business often flourished. The Mathers Hotel in Dundee, for 
    example, was known as a temperance hotel which did not sell alcohol 
    until well into the 1950s.
The temperance movement in Scotland also supported the 
    Gothenburg system, which ran pubs that were unwelcoming and did not 
    encourage alcohol consumption - a direct response to the highly 
    decorated Victorian-style drinking palaces where men - and 
    sometimes women - could lose many an hour.
Incentives were paid to sell food and soft drinks and profits 
    were put back into community projects, such as libraries. These 
    “Goths” took hold primarily in Fife and other mining areas.
The Prestoungrange Gothenburg in Prestonpans is one survivor of 
    the Goth movement, and has recently been completely refurbished.
Coffeehouses too became popular amongst temperance folk. Glasgow 
    had 20 by the 1840s, including many in the Cranston’s chain.
The work of the societies devoted to abstinence and moderation 
    were highly regarded by some for their influence on social reform 
    and politically the movement was gaining levers.
On peer of the day commented
     : “Without these societies 
    we should be involved in such an ocean of intoxication, violence 
    and sin as would make this country quite uninhabitable.”
Forbes Mackenzie, a Conservative MP, temperance reformer and son 
    of Colin, writer to the signet in Edinburgh, introduced the Public 
    Houses (Scotland) Bill in 1853 which, once enacted, forced the 
    closure of pubs in Scotland at 10pm on weekdays and on Sundays.
In 1906, the landslide Liberal victory led to the legislation 
    that allowed communities to veto alcohol consumption with the 
    Temperance Scotland Act passed in 1913.
But perhaps the greatest force for abstinence came with WWI, 
    when tight restrictions were placed on alcohol sale to preserve 
    resources. 
The Defence of the Realm Act 1914 led to stricter controls on 
    pub hours, beer was watered down and taxed an extra penny a 
    pint.
Many publicans also lost incentives to sell drink instead 
    preferring to support the armaments industry and keeping workers 
    sober. A ‘No Treating” rule between 1916 and 1919 forbid the buying 
    of rounds of drinks.
The Temperance Movement seized on the mood and in 1920 vast 
    numbers of local votes went ahead.
According to Blocker, the movement experienced an “extraordinary 
    victory” when Edwin Scrymgeour was elected as a Scottish 
    Prohibitionist Party MP for the Dundee constituency.
However, it appeared that his success was limited and he was 
    defeated in 1931.
By WWII, the movement was seen as increasingly irrelevant and 
    archane. Tens of thousands men left for the battlefields once again 
    and the government did not impose the same alcohol restrictions as 
    seen during WWI.
The movement was seen as the preserve of the middle classes and 
    with Scots-at-large unconvinced for the need for controls.
As Blocker said: “Voters were reluctant to endorse change 
    through the local veto, particularly in working class 
    districts.”
Following 1920, just over 500 towns for no change to alcohol 
    laws.
It took until 1976 for parliament to dismantle the legislation 
    set out by Mackenzie, with some parts of Scotland - such as 
    Kilmacolm - taking longer to embrace the new liberties. 
