Pupils find success with literacy project

HUNDREDS of first-year pupils who struggled to 
    understand basic words on their arrival at high school are now able 
    to read and write thanks to a programme which has been rolled out 
    to all of the Capital’s secondaries.
Around 444 S1s – nearly 14 per cent of the roll – were last year 
    found to be in need of remedial help after it emerged many of them 
    found it challenging to combine simple words such as 
    “the” and “sight”, and scored 
    below average in reading tests.
But a new literacy drive called Fast Track has resulted in 
    “massive” gains among three-quarters of pupils 
    taking part, who can successfully read texts appropriate for their 
    age group without significant levels of assistance.
The results have been hailed as a game changer which will 
    significantly boost long-term educational outcomes for Edinburgh’s 
    most vulnerable school children.
Martin Gemmell, the city’s principal educational psychologist, 
    said: “We knew where we had to pick things up, so we’ve made 
    improvements in S1-2.
“We’re one of the five hubs for literacy which the 
    Scottish Government has identified as having good practice which 
    can be shared with other areas.
“We now have an integrated plan to meet literacy needs 
    when they come into nursery until they go through the door in 
    secondary school.”
Based on a system developed by US publisher Science Research 
    Associates, Fast Track sees teachers drill struggling students 
    through key fundamentals such as word sounds and letters as they 
    build their ability to understand more complicated texts.
Broughton High had 47 S1s on the programme – the highest of any 
    school – with 37 youngsters recording “significant 
    gains” in reading and writing over the last session.
And Mr Gemmell said results at individual schools were 
    particularly dramatic, with Craigroyston and Liberton enjoying 
    score improvements that were close to double the city-wide average. 
    “There are many teachers who have been working for a long 
    time on literacy in Edinburgh to bring it forward and this is 
    testament to their success,” he said.
Councillor Paul Godzik, education leader, added: “I am 
    delighted we are starting to see real improvements.”
