Open Scotland
Open Scotland http://openscot.net/ is a cross sector initiative 
    that aims to raise awareness of open education, encourage the 
    sharing of open educational resources, and explore the potential of 
    open policy and practice to benefit all sectors of Scottish 
    education. The initiative was launched in 2013 and was originally 
    supported by Cetis, ALT, SQA and the Jisc RSC Scotland. Since 2015, 
    the University of Edinburgh has provided a home for Open Scotland, 
    with additional support provided by the ALT Scotland SIG. Open 
    Scotland maintains a blog which acts as a focal point to engage the 
    community and disseminate news and developments relating to all 
    aspects of openness in education in Scotland and further afield. 
    
Scottish Open Education Declaration
Open Scotland also supports the Scottish Open Education 
    Declaration an open community draft based on the UNESCO OER 
    Declaration which broadens the scope of the guidelines to encompass 
    all aspects of open education. The ALT Scotland SIG has contacted 
    previous Scottish Government education minsters, Mike Russell and 
    Angela Constance to raise awareness of the Declaration, and in both 
    instances met with an encouraging but non-committal response. In 
    May 2016, following a Cabinet reshuffle, John Swinney was appointed 
    as the new Cabinet Secretary for Education and the ALT Scotland SIG 
    will bring the Declaration to his attention in the autumn.
Although the Scottish Open Education Declaration has not yet 
    gained traction within Scotland it has generated considerable 
    interest elsewhere in Europe, particularly in Slovenia where the 
    Slovenian government are exploring the potential of adopting it. 
    
Scottish Government
Although the Scottish Government allocated a substantial amount 
    of funding to the Open University’s Opening Educational Practices 
    in Scotland Project in 2014, there have been no further open 
    education funding initiatives and open education does not appear to 
    be high on the political agenda. At best, open education is seen as 
    being somewhat peripheral to Scottish Government priorities, 
    primarily due to the perceived lack of a statistical evidence base 
    supporting the impact of open education on learners. 
Opening Educational Practices in Scotland Project
The Open University’s OEPS project, which runs from 2014 – 2017, 
    is funded by the Scottish Funding Council and aims to facilitate 
    best practice in open education in Scotland. The project undertakes 
    a wide range of activities include running workshops and events, 
    providing expert guidance, collating case studies and supporting 
    open practice communities. The project has been particularly 
    successful in engaging with third sector organisations including 
    Scottish Union Learning and Parkinson’s UK. OEPS recently launched 
    a number of open courses developed in collaboration with partners 
    including Understanding Parkinson’s with Parkinson’s UK; My Seaweed 
    Looks Weird, with UHI and the Scottish Association for Marine 
    Science; and Becoming an Open Educator. 
Glasgow Caledonian University
Glasgow Caledonian University became the first university in 
    Scotland to approve an interim open education resources policy in 
    2015  . The policy defines what OERs are, explains why GCU supports 
    their creation, sharing and use, and gives advice on how to cite 
    third party resources.  GCU Library is now undertaking advocacy 
    work and providing training to raise awareness of OER and the 
    policy. The University has also recently established the EdShare 
    repository to manage teaching and learning resources; 300 resources 
    have been deposited in the first 6 months of which 40% are open 
    access. 
University of Edinburgh
The University of Edinburgh’s has also approved an OER policy, 
    which encourages staff and students to make informed decisions 
    about using, creating and publishing OERs to enhance the quality of 
    the student experience. This policy is underpinned by an OER vision 
    which builds on the history of the Edinburgh Settlement, excellent 
    education and research collections, traditions of the Enlightenment 
    and the University’s civic mission. The University also has an OER 
    Service which undertakes a wide range of activities that support 
    staff and students to engage with OER, and help the institution to 
    mainstream digital education across the curriculum.
Rather than implement an OER repository, the University of 
    Edinburgh releases OERs through a wide range of platforms, 
    including flickr, TES, YouTube, Sketchfab, Wikimedia Commons and 
    Media Hopper, the institution’s own media asset management 
    platform. These resources are then aggregated into the University’s 
    one stop shop for open education resources, Open.Ed.
Edinburgh also recently became the first University in Scotland 
    to employ a dedicated Wikimedian in Residence, as an advocate for 
    openness the Wikimedian in residence delivers training events and 
    workshops to further the quantity and quality of open knowledge and 
    enhance digital literacy through skills training sessions and 
    editathons, and redress the gender imbalance of contributors by 
    encouraging more women to engage with Wikimedia and enhance the 
    coverage of articles about women.
Edinburgh’s efforts in supporting open education were recognized 
    earlier this year, when the University was awarded Wikimedia UK’s 
    Partnership Award for hosting the OER 16 Open Culture Conference, 
    and the Association for Learning Technology awarded the Open 
    Education Team third place in the Learning Technologist of the Year 
    team awards. 
University of Dundee
Although Dundee has not yet approved an OER policy, the 
    University is hoping to progress to one in the future. Dundee are 
    currently sharing open licensed student developed content through 
    Vimeo and Flickr channels, including a showcase of OER from Masters 
    in Medical Art students. The School of Dentistry is also using 
    Sketchfab to share CC licensed dental models developed by students. 
    MOOCs
Many Scottish universities have developed MOOCs which are 
    running on a number of commercial platforms including FutureLearn, 
    Coursera and EdX. Although MOOCs are a significant part of the open 
    education landscape, engaging with MOOCs does not necessarily 
    equate to engaging with open education. Only two universities that 
    run MOOCs have developed an OER policy, however anecdotal evidence 
    suggests that a number of institutions are rethinking their MOOC 
    production strategies with a view to making the process more open 
    and sustainable. 
FE Sector
The FE sector is still bedding down after the upheaval of 
    regionalization and mergers. As a result merging institutional 
    systems and creating shared infrastructure has become a priority, 
    however engagement with open education is low. The Re:Source OER 
    repository previously hosted by Jorum has been moved to a new 
    repository ResourceShare, supported by the College Development 
    Network. However while the sector is accepting of open educational 
    practice and OER in theory, colleges tend to be cautious in actual 
    practice and there is more interest in the walled garden approach 
    to sharing educational content. The is some interest in the Blended 
    Learning Consortium led by Heart of Worcestershire College and a 
    number of Scottish colleges have subscribed to join the closed 
    consortium. 
Jisc
Jisc announced the retirement of the national Jorum OER 
    repository in 2015 and the service will finally close at the end 
    ofSeptember 2016. Jorum customers have the option of migrating 
    copies of their content from the repository and selected resources 
    are being migrated to the new Jisc App and Resource Store which 
    will host free and open licensed content alongside paid for 
    content. It remains to be seen how receptive the sector are to this 
    approach with some within the open education community cautioning 
    against the risk of open washing. 
ALT
The Association for Learning Technology is playing and 
    increasingly active role in supporting open education in Scotland. 
    In addition to supporting the Open Scotland initiative, the ALT 
    Scotland SIG liaises with the OEPS Project, hosts annual events to 
    showcase the use of education technology and open education across 
    sector, brings together policy makers at an annual policy summit 
    and raises awareness of open education at Scottish Government 
    level. 
National Library of Scotland
The National Library of Scotland launched a new strategy in 2015 
    and continues to review its open licensing policy with a view to 
    making more of the library’s collections openly available. All 
    images up to 1000px, core metadata and OCR scanned resources are 
    now licensed CC BY, unless the library does not own the copyright, 
    metadata supplied to Europeana is licensed CC0 and high resolution 
    images, extended metadata and manually transcribed resources are 
    licensed CC BY NC SA. In addition, the Library is planning to share 
    more images through Wikimedia Commons. 
Summary
Although there is significant engagement with open education 
    within individual institutions across Scotland, the Scottish 
    Government has yet to recognise the value of open education to 
    expand access to education, widen participation, and support social 
    inclusion. However 2017 marks the anniversary of two significant 
    open education initiatives; the tenth anniversary of the Cape Town 
    Declaration and the fifth anniversary of the UNESCO OER 
    Declaration. These anniversaries will be marked by significant 
    global events and it is possible that these can be leveraged to 
    raise awareness of the value of open education within the Scottish 
    Government and to drive forward the development of national open 
    education policy.
