 Speaking a second language aids stroke recovery 
 The mental challenge of speaking more 
    than one language can boost cognitive recovery after suffering a 
    stroke.
The mental challenge of speaking more than one 
    language can boost cognitive recovery after suffering a stroke. 
    Picture: Getty SHÂN ROSS People who speak more than one language 
    are more likely to recover from a stroke, a study from the 
    University of Edinburgh suggests.
This is the first time that researchers have studied the 
    influence of bilingualism on the recovery of stroke, the second 
    most important cause of cognitive disability after dementia.
The team found that people who speak multiple languages are 
    twice as likely to recover their mental functions after a stroke as 
    those who speak one language.
The study gathered data from 608 stroke patients in Hyderabad, 
    India, who were assessed on factors including attention skills and 
    the ability to retrieve and organise information.
The researchers found about 40 per cent of bilingual patients 
    had normal mental function following a stroke, compared with 20 per 
    cent of single-language patients. The study was carried out in 
    conjunction with Nizam’s Institute of Medical Sciences in 
    Hyderabad.
They chose Hyderabad because it is a multicultural city where 
    many languages are commonly spoken.
Researchers took into account other factors such as smoking, 
    high blood pressure, diabetes and age to ensure results could not 
    be attributed to having a healthier lifestyle.
Previous studies by the same research team showed that people 
    who speak more than one language develop dementia several years 
    later than people who speak one language.
Researchers say these studies suggest the mental challenge of 
    speaking multiple languages can boost cognitive reserve – an 
    improved ability of the brain to cope with damaging influences such 
    as stroke or dementia.
However, researchers say that the study results may not be 
    applicable to all bilingual people because switching languages is a 
    daily reality for patients in Hyderabad but this might not be the 
    case in other places. More research is needed to determine the 
    exact circumstances under which bilingualism can have a positive 
    influence on mental functions.
Co-author, Thomas Bak, of the University of Edinburgh’s school 
    of philosophy, psychology and language sciences, said: 
    “Bilingualism makes people to switch from one language to 
    another, so while they inhibit one language, they have to activate 
    another to communicate.
“This switching offers practically constant brain 
    training which may be a factor in helping stroke patients 
    recover.”
The study, funded by the Indian Council of Medical Research, is 
    published in the American Heart Association journal Stroke.
The lead author is Professor Suvarna Alladi of Nizam’s Institute 
    of Medical Sciences, Hyderabad. 
