Animals provide link between place names and history of 
    language
A study attempting to uncover the earliest use of the English 
    language in Scotland has found place names which help give 
    "vital" clues to Scotland's linguistic past.
Researchers are examining place names in Berwickshire to shed 
    light on the earliest type of English spoken in Scotland.
They found rare animals have lent their names to several places 
    in the region, including Wolf Cleugh - named after the once common 
    wolf which was hunted to extinction in Scottish forests.
The parish of Cranshaws stems from cranes, while the village of 
    Bemersyde is named after bitterns - both once common birds in the 
    Scottish countryside which are now rare.
The three-year Glasgow University project is investigating the 
    earliest roots of the Scots language and focuses on place names, 
    which are the main source of evidence for Anglo-Saxon settlement in 
    northern Britain, and for the Northumbrian dialect of Old English, 
    which developed into Older Scots and northern Middle English.
Dr Simon Taylor, co-investigator of the project, said: 
    "Berwickshire's place names derive from a range of 
    Celtic and Germanic languages including Brittonic, Gaelic, Old 
    English and Old Norse; most later names are from Scots. As evidence 
    of Scotland's complex linguistic past they are of immense 
    value.
"We aim to understand more fully not only the 
    characteristics of the Old Northumbrian dialect, but to discover 
    how Older Scots came to differ from northern Middle English. The 
    project thus addresses one of the most important gaps in current 
    knowledge of English historical linguistics - the earliest form of 
    English spoken in Scotland."
Principal investigator Professor Carole Hough added: 
    "With no evidence of major Norse settlement in the 
    Borders, there is greater continuity of language from Old English 
    to Scots here than elsewhere, so this is the best opportunity we 
    have to establish which features of Scots derive from Old 
    Northumbrian rather than from Old Norse."
The project, running until 2019, will create a searchable 
    website of Berwickshire place names designed for public and 
    academic use.
