Where in Scotland does your surname come from?
 Map of Scottish names. Picture: 
    TSPL/Kirstie Lorimer.
Over the centuries millions of Scots have left their 
    homeland and spread Scottish names across the globe, but where do 
    these names originate?
Scotland has a long and rich history dating back thousands of 
    years.
Yet, the history of Scottish surnames, are by comparison, a much 
    more recent affair.
Until the 12th century, most Scots did not have surnames. It was 
    not until King David I’s decision to give large amounts of Scottish 
    land to Norman nobles in return for their support of the Crown that 
    the Norman tradition of surnames came into fashion.
Choosing a surname was a haphazard affair. You could be the son 
    of somebody (Robertson, Davidson, Johnston) or adopt the Gaelic 
    variation of ‘Mac’ rather than ‘son’ (MacDonald, MacLeod, 
    MacKenzie).
You could take the surname from the nobles who owned the land 
    you worked on, or from the dominant chieftain in your area.
Some chose to be named after their occupation (Shearer, Smith, 
    Taylor) or perhaps after a colour (Brown, Black, Gray). For example 
    Reid, the Scots word for ‘red’, is a common Scottish surname which 
    is indicative of Scotland having a higher-than-normal percentage of 
    redheads.
In the Highlands and Borders of Scotland, the clan system 
    established dominant families with tartans, mottoes, gatherings and 
    weddings, giving centuries of business to grateful kilt makers.
Finally, Scotland has a long tradition of place names becoming 
    first names or surnames (Murray, Angus, 
    Hamilton).
By investigating the origins of Scotland’s common names using 
    historical literature, we are able to map where many of Scottish 
    surnames originate.
The map includes a Highland boundary line which shows us how the 
    Gaelic names of the north differentiated from the rest of the 
    country.
However, the list of names compiled here is by no means an 
    exhaustive list of all names of Scottish origin but rather some of 
    the more common ones.
It is also worth noting that the traditional Scottish clan 
    system was disintegrating - even in its Highland heartland - by the 
    mid to late 1700s. If you have ancestors who had a recognisable 
    clan name by the 1800s this does not necessarily 
    men that they themselves lived in 
    ‘clan territories’.
