Bagpipes set to sound at Bannockburn commemoration 
    

DID the bagpipes sound at Bannockburn? Hardly likely, 
    despite presumptions to the contrary, and if at all, they would be 
    more likely to shrill from the English ranks. 
Musicologists tell us that the earliest known records of 
    bagpipes in the British Isles are English, dating from the 13th and 
    14th centuries; they don’t appear in Scots written records until 
    the 15th century.
This may disappoint devotees of the Mel Gibson school of 
    Scottish history, but it certainly hasn’t deflected Allan 
    MacDonald, a master piper, composer and scholar of Gaelic musical 
    culture, in creating what promises to be an epic piece of music, 
    The Bruce 700, commissioned by Stirling Council to commemorate the 
    forthcoming 700th anniversary of the battle.
To be premiered at Stirling’s Albert Halls on 26 June, the 
    piece, composed by MacDonald in collaboration with cellist and 
    arranger Neil Johnstone, brings together some leading pipers and 
    other traditional musicians with a schools pipe band and other 
    amateur players.
If any instruments were heard during the battle of Bannockburn, 
    they were most likely to have been horns, MacDonald explains. What 
    he has done, however, to mark this most celebrated of Scottish 
    battles at such a pivotal time in Scotland’s history, is to eschew 
    any period instrument approach and use his own musicality and 
    knowledge to create a piece which evokes the violence, tragedy and 
    triumph of the conflict.
Some 50 musicians will be involved, including MacDonald himself 
    and other top-level pipers including his brother, Dr Angus 
    MacDonald, as well as other well known Scottish folk names on 
    fiddles, cellos, harp, saxophone and percussion and singers 
    Kathleen MacInnes, Griogair Labhraidh and Rod Paterson. They will 
    be joined by the Tolbooth fiddle group and the Stirling and 
    District Schools Pipe Band.
MacDonald pays tribute to Johnstone – a cellist steeped in pipe 
    music through his piper father, the late, great Duncan Johnstone – 
    who has orchestrated the hour-long work. There are plans for it to 
    be performed at Celtic Connections and MacDonald would love it to 
    be played in tandem with The Suite for Alan, which Johnstone 
    composed around a piobaireachd lament written by his father.
For The Bruce 700, MacDonald, 58, has drawn 
    upon his own expertise in the realms of piobaireachd – “some 
    of the earliest music we have” – and has incorporated a 
    16th-century example, The Unjust Incarceration, known to have been 
    written by the famous blind piper of Gairloch, Iain Dall MacKay. 
    “So it does reach back towards that period,” says 
    MacDonald, “if perhaps pretty intangibly.” By the same 
    token, he adds, “We talk about Robert the Bruce, 
    this man of Scottish independence, but our concept of Scotland is 
    very far from anyone’s at that time.
“Bruce was of Norman descent, but his great grandfather 
    was an O’Neill, which perhaps explains why he had designs on 
    Ireland, this concept of a unified kingdom of Scotland and Ireland. 
    But of course he was also well in with the English 
    aristocracy.”
Apart from the piobaireachd, MacDonald has incorporated a 
    brosnachadh – a traditional Gaelic incitement to battle, then a 
    lengthy sequence, ‘The Uprising’, which evokes the battlefield 
    mayhem, followed by keening. “I’m using all the modalities 
    of the pipe scale,” he says, “to show the riches of 
    the instrument, but also to suggest the different factions who 
    ultimately supported Bruce.”
He and three other lead pipers will be playing pipes in the key 
    of A, in which Highland pipes tended to be pitched before 
    standardisation into B flat by the pipe band movement. When these 
    pipes give way to the pipe band, the half tone shift, he says, 
    should have additional dramatic effect.
Also incorporated into the piece is Robert Burns’s Scots Wha’ 
    Hae, the tune of which, Hey Tutti Tatti, is held by tradition to 
    have been played at Bannockburn. Certainly it seems to have been 
    sung by Joan of Arc’s Scots archers as they entered Orleans in 
    1429.
He ends with a song he has written to an old Irish tune, The 
    Battle of Arganmore – “a simple, strong melody that always 
    affected me. After celebrating war I’m saying, ‘Hold on, we’re into 
    the 21st century, we’re needing to look at the world and at 
    ourselves and change our psyche and our whole way of 
    thinking.’”
Far from audiences leaving in a state of do-or-die belligerence, 
    “they’ll be hugging each other,” he laughs. They 
    certainly won’t leave unmoved. 
