 On this day in 1896: The Glasgow Subway opens 
Officials gather for a photograph on the 
    opening day of the Glasgow District Subway system. 
120 years ago today the world’s third oldest 
    underground was officially opened. But day one of Glasgow’s 
    ‘Clockwork Orange’ almost ended in catastrophe. 
After five years of construction, and a final bill totalling 
    £1.5 million pounds, Glasgow’s Subway system went live for the 
    first time on 14 December 1896, entering the history books as the 
    world’s third municipal underground railway system after the 
    Budapest Metro and London Underground.
 Glasgow District Subway poster. 
The brainchild of civil engineer Alexander Simpson, it had been 
    built to serve a rapidly-expanding industrial city with a 
    population fast approaching 1 million people. 
The first carriage of the new Glasgow District Subway, as it was 
    originally named, departed Govan Cross at 5am. The first cars were 
    cable-hauled and would remain so until electrification was 
    introduced in 1935. 
As dawn broke it seemed the whole city was out in force and 
    directors and officials were soon congratulating themselves on the 
    success of their new system. However, any fist-pumping or 
    back-slapping was to prove premature.  
Breakdown
 Cars in the process of conversion to 
    electric service in 1935. 
At around 3pm a complete breakdown occurred on the outer circle, 
    causing momentary chaos. Stranded passengers were forced to walk 
    along the lines back to the nearest station. 
A few hours later, as normal service resumed, one man suffered a 
    horrific foot injury as the huge swell of people forced him between 
    the carriage and platform. 
Collision
As if that wasn’t bad enough for day one, worse followed at just 
    before 11pm when a stationary carriage awaiting the signal to 
    approach St Enoch Station from Bridge Street was hit by another car 
    running at near full speed. 
 West Street Subway Station pictured in 
    1966. 
The two carriages were carrying roughly 50 passengers each at 
    the time of the collision and 18 were reported as seriously 
    injured. 
One 14-year-old boy was rendered unconscious and taken to the 
    Royal Infirmary, having suffered a severe cut to his left temple. 
    
The accident made headlines up and down the UK, forcing the 
    closure of the Subway until January the following year. 
An enquiry into the collision concluded that defective 
    electrical connections between the signals had been the cause, 
    although private trials in the weeks leading up to the opening had 
    failed to flag up any major issues.
 Glasgow Subway route map.
Glasgow Subway route map. Picture: Wikimedia Commons 
The driver of the approaching car claimed that he had spotted 
    the stationary carriage but had been unable to stop in time to 
    prevent the collision. 
Despite the accident, the vibe was mostly positive - one of the 
    main complaints being that the number of cars available on day one 
    had been “hopelessly inadequate”. Subway directors countered this 
    by stating that the extreme “rush of traffic” had exceeded all 
    expectations. 
They weren’t wrong - over 9 million passengers travelled on the 
    Glasgow Subway in its first full year of operation. 
‘Six miles for a penny’
When the Subway opened, a fixed fare price of one penny allowed 
    passengers to travel around the six and a half mile long subway as 
    many times as they wished. Many passengers had taken full advantage 
    of this on the inaugural day - including the 14-year-old boy who 
    suffered the severe head injury at 11pm, who, it’s said, had been 
    travelling round and round the system for 8 or 9 hours prior to the 
    collision. The fixed rate was soon abolished in favour of a fare 
    stage system to avoid future congestion. 
Save a refurbishment in the late 1970s which saw the system 
    nicknamed “the Clockwork Orange” on account of its circular route 
    and bright new Metro-Cammell orange carriages, the Glasgow Subway 
    remains largely unaltered. Expansion of the six and half mile long, 
    fifteen station circuit has been discussed on numerous occasions 
    but has never come to fruition.
 Glasgow Underground at Buchanan Street 
    Station in 2001 . 
