Fate of the survivors of the battle of Dunbar 
    revealed

THE fate of Scottish soldiers captured in one of the bloodiest 
    battles of the 17th Century has been revealed by new research 
    launched after the discovery of the bones of their comrades in the 
    grounds of Durham Cathedral.
A study of those who survived the vicious fighting of the Battle 
    of Dunbar in 1650 was carried out by scientists at Durham 
    University, with some being traced as far away as France, Barbados 
    and the USA.
The men were among 3,000 who were herded south after the battle, 
    many of whom died of disease and malnutrition en route or perished 
    in captivity.
A research paper published by the university offers new insight 
    the treatment of those who survived, revealing that some went on to 
    fight for their captors in battles in Ireland and France, while 
    others worked on the salt pans in South Shields and helping drain 
    The Fens in the East of England.
However, the best information comes from America, where some of 
    the Scots were shipped as indentured servants.
Project leader Dr Pam Graves said: “There is a wealth of 
    information about the fate of the Scottish soldiers during and 
    after their imprisonment in Durham, but it is only when you draw 
    all this together that you get a real sense of what became of these 
    men.
“Many were sent as indentured servants, to work for a 
    contracted length of time in order to earn their 
    release.
“Documents from the time tell us the names of the 
    soldiers sent to the USA, where they were sent to and even the name 
    of the ship they voyaged in.
“Tracing their names through history also shows us what 
    these men did once they were released from indenture. Some went on 
    to become successful farmers and we know there are many descendants 
    of these men still living in the USA.”
The Battle of Dunbar was one of the most brutal and short 
    battles of the 17th Century civil wars. The Royalist-supporting 
    Scottish Covenanting army, led by General David Leslie was defeated 
    in less than an hour by Oliver Cromwell’s English Parliamentarian 
    army.
Around 3,000 soldiers were captured and imprisoned in Durham 
    Cathedral and Castle, at a time when the Cathedral was empty and 
    abandoned.
As an estimated 1,700 prisoners from the battle died and were 
    buried in Durham, and their final resting place remained a mystery 
    until bones were uncovered in 2013 within the Cathedral grounds.
Research on the remains is being now undertaken by Durham 
    University’s Department of Archaeology, with the aim of learning 
    more about where the soldiers came from, their health and what 
    illnesses they suffered from at different stages of their lives.
In August 2016 Durham University announced that, once research 
    on the remains is completed, they will be reburied in Durham City, 
    as close as possible to their original burial site.
In late 2016, the University plans to hold a commemorative event 
    and dedicate a plaque to the memory of the soldiers.
The project team travelled to the USA to meet descendants of 
    some of the soldiers who were sent there nearly 400 years ago, and 
    learn more about their lives.
The new publication also explores the men who made up the Scots 
    army, the battle itself and its aftermath in detail.
