Dorothée Pullinger: Built world’s first ‘car for women’ 
    
 Pullinger testing the Galloway in 
    1924.
IN a world dominated by men, Dorothée Aurélie Marianne 
    Pullinger managed to create the world’s first car designed for and 
    made by women in Scotland. Today marks thirty years since the 
    innovative engineer died in Guernsey aged 92.
Born to her car designer father Thomas Pullinger, Dorothée spent 
    her formative years in France before moving to England at the age 
    of eight in 1902.
 Galloway adverts emphasised the 
    luxuries aspects of the car.
Only eight years later, she took a junior role in the drawing 
    office of Scottish car manufacturer Arrol-Johnston before the onset 
    of the First World War.
During the conflict, however, Pullinger continued to make a name 
    for herself as a determined engineer after being denied a place in 
    the Institute of Automobile Engineers (IAE) because of her 
    gender.
At age 20, Pullinger was made Lady Superintendent of 
    approximately 7,000 female war workers at Barrow-in-Furness in 
    Cumbria. Her team produced bombs for the British war effort, 
    earning her an MBE and acceptance into the IAE as its first-ever 
    female member.
It was her work from the 1920s onwards as director and manager 
    of Galloway Motors Ltd that really cemented the talented reputation 
    of the 26-year old. 

The factory, staffed by women in Tongland, Kirkcudbright, 
    produced the Galloway motor car.
With approximately 10 to 20 horsepower from its 1.5-litre 
    four-cylinder engine, the Galloway’s mechanicals were based on the 
    Fiat 501 of the era, but the car itself was designed with women in 
    mind.
As female drivers were typically shorter than their male 
    equivalents of the time, the seating position was raised and the 
    dashboard lowered to accomodate shorter women. Variants of the 
    Galloway also featured more storage space than other models, and 
    the gear lever was mounted inside the car instead of outside the 
    bodywork - which was common practice for cars of the time. So 
    forward-thinking was the design, the Galloway was one of the first 
    cars worldwide to feature an interior-mounted rear-view mirror. 
 Dorothée Aurélie Marianne Pullinger 
    managed not only to invent and manufacture her own car, but also 
    received an MBE for her engineering efforts during her
     lifestime
In addition, the Galloway was also lighter, smaller and 
    marginally more reliable than other cars of its era.
Pullinger demonstrated the car’s capabilities at the Scottish 
    Six Day Trials in 1924, which her car won. Despite these qualities, 
    only 4,000 were made in approximately eight years of production 
    over two factories, with the latter cars produced at Heathhall from 
    1923. The engineer left her role as a sales representative for the 
    company in 1928 in order to found White Service Laundries in 
    Croydon, after Galloway and model-sharing company Arrol-Johnston 
    closed down.
The Second World War brought her an opportunity to further her 
    new career, as the sole female to be appointed to the Industrial 
    Panel of the Ministry of Production. Here, she helped organise 
    female recruits for munitions factories and address logistical 
    issues relating to industry problems after the war.
After her demanding role, she took a slower pace of life by 
    opening another laundry service in Guernsey, where she resided 
    until her death in 1986. 
 A Galloway car pictured at a Biggar car 
    rally in 2008.
To this day, Pullinger holds the accolade of being the first 
    designer to spot the need for a different design to suit female 
    drivers. She is also unique in having the design and engineering 
    solutions to make her idea a reality; a feat made all the more 
    impressive given that she did this during a time when engineering 
    very much was a man’s role. 
