Gloomy forecast for Scotland’s economy after oil price 
    slump 
 Experts said the Scottish economy was 
    being buffeted by factors including the fallout from the weak oil 
    price,  challenging  global trade and underperformance in key parts 
    of the powerhouse services sector. 
Scotland’s economy has slowed sharply and risks 
    stalling this year as businesses struggle with the oil price slump, 
    a top think-tank has warned.
Economists now expect growth to be the poorest since 2012 after 
    slashing forecasts for the current year.
The EY Scottish Item Club – the only major economic body to use 
    the UK Treasury’s forecasting model – estimates Scotland’s economy 
    will expand by 1.2 per cent in 2016, down from an earlier forecast 
    of 1.8 per cent. That compares with a downwardly-revised 2 per cent 
    forecast for the UK economy flagged by Chancellor George Osborne in 
    his March Budget. 
Scotland suffered a shorter and shallower recession than the 
    UK’s, but the economic recovery north of the Border has trailed the 
    rest of Britain. Experts said the Scottish economy was being 
    buffeted by factors including the fallout from the weak oil price, 
    “challenging” global trade and underperformance in key parts of the 
    powerhouse services sector.
While robust consumer spending has been helping to prop up 
    activity, economists warn that confidence remains fragile. 
In a further blow, today’s Business Trends Report from 
    accountancy firm BDO shows subdued activity in three of Scotland’s 
    most important industrial sectors. Construction, manufacturing, and 
    oil and gas have all reported reduced activity, and business 
    optimism has plummeted.
Dougie Adams, senior economic adviser to the EY Scottish Item 
    Club said: “While it is not our expectation at the moment, 
    it would not take much of an accident somewhere in the world 
    economy to undermine growth altogether. The global economy is 
    fragile and if confidence got a shake then consumer spending could 
    become an issue.”
He said the Item Club report was based on current economic 
    policies and did not have the scope to go into what a Brexit vote 
    would mean.
But he remained upbeat: “Scotland now faces a third 
    consecutive year of slowing GDP growth in 2016. But as the negative 
    impact of the oil price bust on growth fades in 2017 and 2018 the 
    pace of expansion should pick up, with an output increase of 2 per 
    cent expected from next year.” 
Scottish Secretary David Mundell described the report’s findings 
    as a “cause for concern”, which confirmed the “significant impact” 
    on the Scottish economy of the low global oil price.
He said: “The UK government is determined – working with 
    the Scottish Government – to do everything possible to boost 
    Scotland’s economy, its productivity and protect jobs.”
According to the BDO research, businesses in Scotland and across 
    the UK fear the economy “is not going anywhere while the 
    European Union referendum result remains unknown”.
BDO’s output index – which reflects companies’ experience of 
    orders on hand – has fallen below the level that indicates 
    long-term trend growth for the first time since 2013. The 
    employment index, which highlights firms’ intentions to hire, has 
    dropped well below the level seen in the same month last year.
Martin Gill, head of BDO in Scotland, said: “A reduction 
    in output and optimism cannot just be put down to uncertainty due 
    to the EU referendum and may have some more deep-rooted causes. We 
    need to see greater investment and higher productivity to improve 
    capacity, encourage growth and ultimately drive up living 
    standards.”
The forecasts come as a study by Bank of Scotland suggested that 
    almost half of UK oil and gas firms are planning further 
    cost-cutting to help manage the impact of the downturn.
Jackie Baillie, Scottish Labour’s economy spokeswoman, said: 
    “These figures underline the devastating impact the oil 
    crisis has had on workers in the North-east and right across the 
    supply chain.” 
