Archaeologists find Bronze Age settlement on Orkney 
    
 The remnants of the Bronze Age 
    settlement at low tide at Tresness, Sanday, Orkney
Find could be one of the biggest of its kind in 
    Scotland.
A team led by the Archaeology Institute at the University of the 
    Highlands and Islands found what is believed to be 14 separate 
    example of Bronze Age houses at Tresness, Sanday this week, amid 
    appalling weather ­conditions.
It is thought that the find represents one of the biggest 
    settlements of its kind in Scotland. 
Professor Jane Downes of UHI, who specialises in the Bronze Age, 
    said she was astonished by the extent of the settlement area, which 
    could have been home to Orkney dwellers between 3,000 and 4,000 
    years ago.
She said: “This must be one of the biggest complexes of 
    Bronze Age settlement in the Scottish isles, rivalling the spreads 
    of hut circles in other parts of mainland Scotland.”
Prof Downes arrived at Tressnes with a team of archaeologists 
    from across the UK to examine an eroding stalled cairn on the 
    point. Working alongside Dr Vicki Cummings from the University of 
    Central Lancashire, they identified a circular spread of stones 
    lying nearby on the western side of the ness. As the team examined 
    the spread of remnants, a large number of stone mattocks – similar 
    to pickaxes – were discovered with stone bars, hammerstones and 
    stone flaked knives.
A spokesman for the Archaeology Institute at UHI said: 
    “Closer examination revealed sections of stone walls and 
    uprights, which were clearly part of a house structure. 
“No sooner was the spread of stones identified as the 
    remains of a Bronze Age house, when another spread of stones was 
    seen lying just a few metres away. This too was another house 
    structure covered with a mass of stone tools.
“As the group continued walking along the sand, one after 
    another a series of Bronze Age sites were discovered.”
The houses became visible as shapes made out of stones, all in 
    different formations, with some 14 examples scattered over a one 
    kilometre stretch of sand.
The settlement appears to have been sealed beneath the massive 
    sand dunes that characterise the approach to Tresness but which are 
    eroding beneath the dune complex.
The UHI spokesman added: “It was the scale and density of 
    occupation that really surprised the archaeologists as they 
    proceeded along the ness. Not only are house structures present but 
    working areas are also visible.”
There have been several recent finds which point to Bronze Age 
    life on Orkney. They include a very rare building discovered in 
    September on Westray, which experts believe could have been used as 
    a sauna or steam house, possibly for ritualistic purposes.
The sauna was found close to where the “Westray Wife” was found 
    in 2009 – a small Neolithic figurine, it is the first carving of a 
    human form to be found in Scotland and the earliest depiction of a 
    face found in the UK.
The UHI spokesman said: “Similar Bronze Age houses have recently 
    been excavated at the Links of Noltland, Westray but the scale of 
    the Sanday discovery is unparalleled in Orkney.” 
