Battle of Culloden: myths debunked
 Battle scenes at Culloden
SCOTTISH historian and author Trevor Royle examines 
    troubled Culloden in his new book and the myth-making surrounding 
    the historic battle.
FOR many years the Battle of Culloden has been acknowledged as 
    the last of the battles that have disfigured the frequently 
    troubled relationship between England and Scotland.

The Culloden Visitor Centre, near Inverness, which tells the 
    story of the infamous battle. Picture: Jane Barlow
It was fought by two armies, one led by the Duke of Cumberland 
    on the Hanoverian side (the government or royal army) and the other 
    by Prince Charles Edward Stuart or Bonnie Prince Charlie (the 
    Jacobite or Highland army).
Contrary to popular belief, not all of the 9000 soldiers in 
    Cumberland’s army were English and not all of the 5000 in the 
    Jacobite army were Scots or even Highlanders, but that did not stop 
    the myth-making.
In time Culloden was personified as a fight between the English 
    and the Scots, or even as a battle involving romantic kilted 
    Highlanders on one side and dastardly red-coated English and 
    Lowland Scots on the other.
Neither is true, but both viewpoints came to be accepted, 
    largely as a result of a deep-seated need to mythologise the former 
    and demonise the latter. As a result ‘Culloden’ became useful 
    shorthand to delineate Scotland’s history in terms of battles 
    fought long ago, such as Bannockburn, a justly famous victory for 
    the Scottish King Robert Bruce over the army of King Edward II in 
    1314; or Flodden, a disastrous setback two hundred years later when 
    James IV, an otherwise sensible king, led his country’s army to a 
    quite unnecessary defeat at the hands of the English Earl of Surrey 
    on 9 September 1513.

Circa 1746, Prince William Augustus, Duke of Cumberland (1721 - 
    1765), the third son of King George II, and leader of the 
    victorious British government forces against the rebellious 
    Jacobite Scots at Culloden in 1746. He became known as 'the 
    Butcher' Picture: Hulton Archive/Getty Images
To be fair, modern historians have worked hard and successfully 
    to correct those impressions; most recent accounts of the Battle of 
    Culloden place it firmly within the context of a doomed 
    French-supported rebellion raised in the name of the Catholic 
    Stuarts and aimed at unseating the reigning Hanoverian royal 
    family.
It has also come to be regarded – rightly so – as one of the 
    battles in the contemporaneous War of the Austrian Succession 
    (1740–8), which took its name from the failure of the ruler of the 
    Hapsburg monarchy to father a male heir and involved most of the 
    European powers.
This violent struggle was fought initially in continental 
    Europe, pitting Britain and her allies against the combined forces 
    of France and Spain – both Catholic countries – and the threat of 
    French invasion was rightly feared. It was not simply a religious 
    war, in which Protestant fought Catholic – Britain’s principal 
    ally, Hapsburg Austria, was of the latter persuasion – but as the 
    fighting spread into the Caribbean and North America it gave 
    British foreign policy a religious dimension by stimulating 
    anti-Catholic sentiments.
 The Culloden Battlefield.
Prince Charles Edward Stuart was a Catholic and had been 
    supported by King Louis XV of France, albeit somewhat 
    half-heartedly.
The inference was clear: at a time when Britain was engaged in a 
    conflict aimed at suppressing what seemed to be Catholic tyranny, 
    the Jacobites were viewed as part of an international conspiracy in 
    which the Stuart cause was inextricably linked to the global 
    interests of France and her allies.
It was perhaps not surprising that, long 
    fter Bonnie Prince Charlie had 
    arrived in Moidart with his followers during the summer of 1745, 
    the government in London began enforcing long-dormant laws aimed at 
    preventing Catholics from bearing arms, owning horses or gathering 
    in large numbers for worship or other purposes. As one contemporary 
    verse had it, the Catholic Anti-christ had ‘join’d with a Hellish 
    Band of Jacobite Thieves’.
At the time, and in the years following the uprising, the 
    British government was quite sanguine about the fact that within 
    Britain support for the Jacobites had been confined to Scotland and 
    was prevalent mainly amongst the Highland population. That was 
    known and understood, but there had also been widespread fears 
    about the country’s capacity to contain the Catholic threat.
Cumberland’s victory at Culloden eased those concerns by 
    eliminating the Jacobite menace, putting paid to Catholic 
    interference in domestic and foreign policy and thwarting, for the 
    time being, the enemy’s territorial ambitions. With those threats 
    crushed or at least confined to the Scottish Highlands, which would 
    shortly undergo a process of rapid and violent pacification, the 
    government was able to turn its mind to determining the future of 
    British power and to the prospect of expanding its influence in the 
    wider world.
Many of those involved in that imperial process were young 
    officers of the British Army who had learned their trade while 
    serving under Cumberland; as history was to show, they had learned 
    their lesson well.
There was certainly no lack of opportunity for them to hone 
    their military skills. No sooner had the Culloden campaign ended 
    than many were back in action, fighting against the French and 
    their allies in Flanders until the war ended in 1748.
It was only a short respite. Within eight years Britain was to 
    be at France’s throat again, fighting the Seven Years War 
    (1756–63), which forms most of the background for the present book. 
    Not only was this one of the most successful wars ever fought by 
    Britain, but it put paid to French hopes of building a world empire 
    in North America, India and the Caribbean. At the same time a rival 
    British empire was cemented in those same territories and in 
    Britain the Hanoverian dynasty was secured once and for all.
There was to be further fighting between Britain and France in 
    1778, but that came about as a result of a revolt by the North 
    American colonists who received French support. The final 
    confrontation in 1793–1815 was prompted by the French Revolution 
    and led to the collapse of the French Empire created by Napoleon 
    Bonaparte.
Although the latter two conflicts are not strictly part of the 
    present story, they have been alluded to within the narrative as 
    the lives and careers of many of the participants span all the wars 
    fought against France in the second half of the eighteenth 
    century.
It is a well-attested fact that between the Act of Union, which 
    brought Britain into being in 1707, and the final defeat of 
    Napoleon in 1815, which ended French dreams of imperial domination, 
    the two countries were rarely at peace; and that experience had an 
    impact on the development of the British Army.
Most of the senior officers in the Duke of Cumberland’s army 
    came from English or Irish backgrounds or were Lowland Scots – in 
    other words they were British – and after Culloden many of them 
    went on to enjoy solid and in some cases spectacular careers in the 
    British Army as a result of the patronage of their commanding 
    general.
They were Cumberland’s men and they quickly became an 
    identifiable military grouping within the British Army when they 
    served in the European, North American and Indian theatres of 
    military operations. In the parlance of a later age and usage they 
    belonged to ‘Cumberland’s Ring’.
In so doing they showed that they had learned the lessons of the 
    Jacobite campaign and remembered them in later operations. Perhaps 
    the most pertinent, because it was the most potent, was the value 
    of sustained and disciplined musketry. At Cumberland’s insistence 
    the lines of government infantrymen had been instructed in new 
    drills to counter the ferocious charge of claymore-wielding 
    clansmen when they clashed at Culloden, but it was the unrelenting 
    volleys of rapid and accurate musket fire from the infantrymen 
    which won the day.
Backed by artillery the tactics soon became a battle winner, as 
    was made evident during the later Battles of Minden and the Plains 
    of Abraham, two of the most successful set-piece battles (from a 
    British point of view) of the Seven Years War. Equally, in the 
    counter-insurgency phase which followed Culloden, battalion 
    commanders used tactics which would be employed later against 
    native American allies of the French in the fighting in North 
    America – displacing the population and destroying their property 
    as part of a group punishment for supporting the opposition.
Although they are to be deplored and achieved nothing other than 
    alienation and a long-lasting bitterness, such tactics were not 
    untypical of the period. However, more astute commanders came round 
    to the belief that in warfare of that kind the population had to be 
    won over.
During the post-Culloden period there was considerable 
    discussion about the value of using the army as a force for good in 
    restoring order and obliterating the root causes of rebellion. But 
    the main characteristic that unites the officers in the Cumberland 
    Ring is that, like all good soldiers, they learned from their 
    experiences in the Jacobite campaign, profited from them and put 
    them to good use in the Seven Years War, especially in the fighting 
    in North America and India which gained Britain its first 
    empire.
