Visual art review: Blackadder | McClure | Rae

by DUNCAN MACMILLAN
ELIZABETH Blackadder is both one of our most popular, 
    distinguished artists.
Elizabeth Blackadder: Etchings and Screen 
    Prints
Glasgow Print Studio
Star rating: * * * *

David McClure: Paintings and Drawings 
    1952-1963
Cyril Gerber Fine Art, Glasgow
Star rating: * * * *
Barbara Rae: Place and Process
Gateway Galleries, St Andrews
Star rating: * * *
It is not often that you can say an artist is both of those 
    things. They are not the same at all and so popularity can tell 
    against an artist who manages to be both. Indeed, it would be quite 
    wrong to dismiss her as just a painter of cats and flowers and the 
    retrospective held a few years ago to mark her 80th birthday should 
    have dispelled any such erroneous impression. It did not include an 
    extensive selection of her prints, however, although they represent 
    an important part of Blackadder’s achievement. The disciplines of 
    printmaking have proved particularly sympathetic to the wonderful 
    draftsmanship and sense of economy that underlie her art.
She has made prints ever since she worked with the pioneering 
    Edinburgh printers, the Harley brothers, back in the 1950s, but she 
    has worked particularly intensively since she began to collaborate 
    with the Glasgow Print Studio in 1985. Working with them 
    continuously since then, Blackadder has produced more than a 
    hundred prints including etchings, lithographs and screen prints. 
    Now the Print Studio is exhibiting a selection of this work and 
    while not exactly a print retrospective, the show does give some 
    impression of the range and real quality of her work as a 
    printmaker. Japanese Table, the earliest print in the show, dates 
    from 1987. It consists of a pair of compositions of still life 
    objects drawn in simple outline and printed on a single sheet, one 
    in dark green ink, the other in yellow. What is striking about this 
    print is its simplicity and how its lack of adornment allows us to 
    appreciate the quality of the etched line. A more elaborate etching 
    from 1992 shows a boat drawn up on a beach. Here again she uses the 
    etched line in a firm, direct and undecorative way. It is wiry and 
    tough and seems a long way from cats and flowers. But when you do 
    look at the cats and flowers, of which there are a good many, you 
    find, perhaps unexpectedly, the same qualities. Amalia sleeping, 
    for instance, is a black and white etching of a cat sleeping in a 
    rather abandoned pose with its legs in the air. The same toughness 
    in the way it is drawn and the way the drawing is turned into the 
    wiry, almost spiky line of etching makes it anything but coy, cosy 
    or anthropomorphic. It is an independent creature, like a leopard 
    sleeping on a branch, quite indifferent to any human concerns.
Silk screen printing is very different from etching. As its name 
    implies it uses screens of colour. Where etching bites and is 
    printed under pressure, silk screen sits on the surface of the 
    paper and Blackadder uses this quality to great effect. In one 
    screen print, for instance, four brightly coloured fish sit on the 
    page, one above the other, the smallest on top. There’s nothing 
    else. It is has the simplicity and impact of a classic Chinese 
    brush painting, but with the added dimension of brilliant colour. 
    Etching can also be coloured, however, and perhaps her most 
    remarkable prints are a series of coloured etchings of orchids. 
    These are botanical, or at least the orchids have their Latin names 
    inscribed in the plate and they are clearly accurate depictions of 
    the plants concerned, but they are a long way from any conventional 
    botanical illustration. Colour is used sparingly, but the way she 
    draws the flowers, exploiting to the full the line of etching, 
    gives them a vivid graphic presence, an almost living character. 
    They are remarkable prints, low-key but memorable.
Born in 1926, David McClure is older than Elizabeth Blackadder. 
    As students at Edinburgh College of Art the two were part of a 
    distinguished generation of students of William Gillies, though 
    McClure was also very much influenced by the poetic painting of 
    John Maxwell, who also taught there. David McClure: Paintings and 
    Drawings 1952-1963 at the Compass Gallery is a collection of work 
    from the first decade of his career. There are a number of 
    characteristic paintings. One called The Ritualists II, for 
    instance, is a fantasy with a haloed saint at its centre, flanked 
    by a bishop, a woman who might have strayed from a painting by 
    Picasso and various birds and flowers, all painted in rich dark 
    colour and heavy impasto. Two comic doodles of a bishop, evidently 
    done in an idle moment, suggest that the figures are no more than 
    an occasion for a capriccio on a religious theme and that there was 
    no other intention than to make an intriguing image. Nevertheless, 
    McClure is best when most direct. Bamboo Fence, Sicily, for 
    instance, is a painting of olive trees through the screen of a 
    broken bamboo fence. Rich in colour and evocative in atmosphere, it 
    looks back to Bonnard and Van Gogh.
The main part of this show, however, is a collection of works on 
    paper done in the 1950s, when McClure went to Italy and as far 
    south as Sicily, but also spent time at Millport in Great Cumbrae. 
    He had a rare gift as a draughtsman, not only as a master of line, 
    which is what we think of as the principal constituent of good 
    drawing, but also of tone. Houses and Walls, Millport, for example, 
    is a charcoal drawing. No more glamorous than its title suggests, 
    it is just a view of houses, stone walls and a telephone pole in 
    plain black and white, but the tone of everything is so beautifully 
    observed that you almost think you are seeing colour. There is the 
    same subtlety in his drawings in ink and wash, while a line drawing 
    of a jug of flowers is sharply observed yet also freely drawn, and 
    you can clearly see the common ground he shared with Blackadder. 
    Their generation took for granted this command of drawing, but now 
    that it is no longer the backbone of teaching, future generations 
    will struggle to match it.
Blackadder is one of only two artists resident in Scotland who 
    are members of the Royal Academy in London. Barbara Rae is the 
    other and she is currently having a small show at the University of 
    Saint Andrews. The university did have a very good gallery, but, 
    short-sightedly, closed it down. Inevitably, they still need an 
    exhibition space, but for all the success and prosperity of the 
    institution, all it has is a cramped space off the canteen in its 
    modern North Haugh Campus. It has a distinctly corporate feel to it 
    and this does affect the art. Rae’s show consists mainly of screen 
    prints, etchings and monotypes, but with a handful of related 
    works. Her prints are very different from Blackadder’s. She uses 
    breadth and rich colour where Blackadder uses precision and 
    economy, but they evoke the broad and sunny landscapes that are her 
    subject. Drawings in her sketchbooks show the kind of observation 
    that is her starting point. The show also includes a tapestry based 
    on Fishpool-Lacken, a monotype which hangs beside it. It is a bold 
    and simple composition of bands of dark blue and red gold. It is 
    too crowded here. The richness of Rae’s colour demands a more 
    austere, less glossy environment. It is time Saint Andrews thought 
    again about its gallery.
