Scottish Clan Profile: Grant
THE name Grant is thought to have originated with the 
    Norman invasion force, though this has been disputed with claims 
    the origins of the clan is indeed Norse.
The origins of the name meaning itself is also disputed with 
    suggestions that include a derivative of the French word grande, 
    and the more popular belief that it came from Sliabh Grianais – the 
    moor above Aviemore- which was held, also by tradition, to be the 
    first land in Scotland occupied by the Grant progenitors.
Indeed it is even assumed the pronunciation of the name is wrong 
    and that today’s more popular pronunciation Grant, would have 
    originally been pronounced more like ground but ending with a T 
    instead of a D.
Whatever the provenance of the name it cannot be disputed that 
    the family has been an influential one.
The first of the Grants recorded in Scotland was in the 13th 
    century when they acquired the lands of Stratherrick, the first of 
    the named chiefs being Lawrence le Grand.
Wars of Scottish Independence
During Wallace’s rebellion, clan Grant added their banner to 
    those who followed Wallace and fought for him in several battles, 
    John and Randolph Grant were both captured by English forces at the 
    battle of Dunbar in 1293.
The family then picked the right side in the subsequent wars of 
    succession, by supporting clan Bruce in their push for the crown. 
    When Robert the Bruce was finally named king after a long struggle, 
    the Grants were rewarded with lands in Strathspey which then became 
    their base and remain so to this day.
16th Century
By the 16th century the clan’s growth in influence had risen 
    massively and they found themselves now very much at the forefront 
    of national politics, their main allies being the clan Gordon and 
    the powerful earl of Huntly.
Though by 1580 this alliance soured as the now predominately 
    protestant Grants began to argue with the Catholic Gordon’s over 
    religion.
There followed several clashes including the most famous, which 
    resulted in a defeat for the Grants by the Gordons and their allies 
    at the battle of Ballindalloch.
Civil War and the Jacobite uprisings
During the civil war in the 17th century Scotland was torn 
    between the Scottish Royalists — supporters of Charles I under the 
    command of James Graham 1st Maquis of Montrose - and the 
    Covenanters who had controlled Scotland since 1639 and who were 
    allied with the English Government under Cromwell.
During this time the Grants, who were staunch supporters of the 
    Covenanters, led by David Grant fought the Royalists at the battle 
    of Tippermuir in 1644.
This was followed by a battle with Clan Cameron over a territory 
    squabble before the Grants switched sides to fight alongside King 
    Charles at the battle of Worcester against the predominantly 
    English forces in which the Royalists were soundly defeated. The 
    Grants however remained in favour of the British Government, with 
    six hundred of them joining Colonel Livingstone to fight under the 
    banner of William of Orange against the Jacobite uprising.
They continued this support during the subsequent uprisings, 
    though many of the clan still fought for the Jacobites.
In 1725 the Grants were part of the force formed from several 
    clans which went on to become the 42nd Highlanders, famously known 
    as the Blackwatch.
Though several branches of the clan did decide to fight on the 
    side of the Jacobites with several hundred fighting against the 
    Hanoverians at Culloden.
Highland Clearances
The clan survived the worst ravages of the highland clearances 
    due to the prestigious efforts of clan Chief Sir James Grant, who 
    built an entire town for his clan to ensure their survival. 
    Grantown-on-Spey, which was built to provide all they needed 
    including schools, mills, a hospital and even an orphanage.
Whisky
The clan is perhaps most famous through its contribution to the 
    whisky world. William Grant a descendant of the clan, built the now 
    famous Glenfiddich distillery by hand with the help of his seven 
    sons. The distillery began production on Christmas day 1887, this 
    in turn led to the creation of a second distillery Balvennie and 
    now Glenfiddich is exported to 180 countries around the world.
Clan Motto:- Stand Fast (Craig Elachie), 
    this was the supposed battle cry that called the Grants to arms 
    alongside the burning summit at the top of Craig Elachie, the high 
    hill in Strathspey.
Castles:- Castle Grant, seat of the Clan 
    chief, Ballindalloch Castle.
Notable Clan members:- Sir James Grant, the 
    builder of Grantown-on-Spey, Lawrence Le Grande, William Grant 
    (founder of William Grant & Sons)
Titles:- Baron of Strathspey.
Current clan chief:- The current Chief of 
    Clan Grant is the Rt. Hon The Lord 
    Strathspey, Sir James Patrick Trevor Grant of Grant, Bt, 6th Baron 
    Strathspey, 33rd hereditary Clan chief of Clan Grant.
