A dash of cold water can bring a nation to its sense of 
    history 
IMPACT and interdisciplinarity are fashionable in 
    academic circles. There is much talk of removing barriers, building 
    bridges and contributing to change and development. Sometimes new 
    areas of knowledge open up or new critical approaches to existing 
    knowledge emerge.
Great! And it is true that more of us need to get out of the 
    academy and talk in language people understand. So it was with an 
    open mind that I read Professor Robert J C Young's article 
    (The Scotsman, 16 August, 2010), "Scots' goal must be 
    postcolonial nationhood".
Approaching Scottish history from the perspective of critical 
    theory need not be a flawed exercise, but unfortunately Young 
    demonstrates a woeful ignorance of the subject matter. The problem 
    is that history is essentially an evidence-based discipline. We 
    start with the records, not from fashionable ideas. Postcolonial 
    theory may get the undergraduates talking, but when imposed on the 
    evidence the resulting analysis is simply wrong. Given the 
    political thrust of the article, nudging the reader towards 
    independence, this abuse of history is unacceptable.
There is a lot about feelings in Young's approach to 
    history. No bad thing when trying to get primary school children to 
    empathise with people in different societies, but hardly a grown-up 
    approach to complex issues. Students of history need to look at the 
    facts and interpret them with a level of objectivity. Edinburgh and 
    Glasgow may "feel" like postcolonial cities to some 
    people, and there might be those who think Scotland 
    "seemed" to be an internal colony. But Glasgow was an 
    imperial city built on the exploitation of other peoples and 
    Scotland was never a colony.
Yes, Scotland is ruled from Westminster and Scots MPs have 
    constituted a minority there since 1707. So what? Were they an an 
    underprivileged minority who deferred to their English superiors 
    and were denied office and power? No, there just happen to have 
    been fewer Scots than English then and now — deal with it.
So how do we make the leap to the assertion that Scotland 
    "feels like a colony to the inhabitants"? The answer, 
    Young tells us, lies in the ability to side-step awkward details — 
    "objective measures" — and to take account of subjective 
    experiences. If it feels like the Dark Ages, it must be the Dark 
    Ages and so on. Even though Scotland "was never 
    actually a colony" we can work ourselves up into a 
    postcolonial lather and look for someone to blame.
Enter the English, the imperial stormtroopers intent on 
    subjugating brave Caledonia. It seems this dastardly race had been 
    fruitlessly attempting "to take Scotland by force since the 
    13th century". I doubt if there is a serious Scottish 
    historian anywhere who believes that statement to be true. But why 
    bother about facts? We can ignore the aggressive expeditions over 
    the Border by Stewart kings, the invasions by the Covenanters in 
    the 1640s and the Jacobites in 1745. When you need a bad guy to get 
    your post-colonial angst going it's better just to make it up. 
    And before you know it, Scotland is "a defeated nation 
    doomed to become a virtual colony of England".
How do we deal with Scottish involvement in Britain's 
    imperial adventure? Thank goodness for paradoxes since, according 
    to Young, Scotland was at once colonised and a coloniser. Just 
    brush aside the Scottish slave trade, the plunder brought back from 
    India, the fortunes made dealing in opium and Scottish involvement 
    in the shameful treatment of indigenous peoples throughout the 
    world. No, what matters is how the poor, downtrodden Scots feel.
And if your eyes are still dry, here comes the trump card: the 
    Highlands. You see it wasn't really Scotland that suffered the 
    "destruction and oppression of colonial 
    rule". No, it was the Highlanders, who were bashed 
    about not only by "the English" but by lowland Scots. 
    Confused? No need to worry, its just postcolonial theory, and if 
    everyone is colonising everyone else so much the better. Throw in 
    emotive words like "genocidal", "exterminated" 
    and "decimation" in juxtaposition to 
    "Clearances" and you might be forgiven for thinking that 
    the Himmler got his inspiration from the Hanoverians.
Like some maudlin folk singer Young conjures up empty glens and 
    the absence of Gaelic language to raise awareness of 
    "Scotland's brutal history of subjection to 
    colonial rule". But, Wallace-like, he rouses the Scots 
    to become a postcolonial nation. Then we can kill off the tourist 
    industry by populating the glens with people who would rather live 
    where there are jobs and force our children to learn a language 
    that will be utterly useless in the global marketplace.
So is there a role for historical analysis in discussing 
    nationhood and independence? Of course there is. The vibrancy and 
    power of the medieval kingdom, the sophistication of the early 
    modern parliament and law courts, the dynamic energy of the 
    Reformed Kirk, the entrepreneurial spirit of the 18th-century 
    landowners and merchants, the cultural achievements of the 
    Enlightenment and the industrial might of the Clyde constitute an 
    impressive heritage. 
But historians must also draw attention to the weaknesses of the 
    Scottish kingdom, the problems in farming marginal land in the 15th 
    century or in subsidised industries in the 20th century, the 
    uncomfortable relationship with violence and an enthusiasm for 
    imperial adventure. You can't choose your history or your 
    ancestors.
As for independence, an informed education in Scottish history 
    might lead some people to conclude that independence is the road to 
    ruin, and it only fair that I declare my own unionist sympathies. 
    Others might decide that the historical forces that made the United 
    Kingdom a successful state have run their course and Scotland 
    should again strike out on its own.
Academic historians should be wary of pronouncing on what is 
    true. It is our responsibility, however, to highlight the dangers 
    in misusing history, to pour cold water on emotive, manipulative 
    language and to expose sloppy thinking. 
