Britain a Christian Country? Heavens Above!
Given that I have little regard for most of the devils 
    that pack the pews in the great Palace of Sin we call Westminster, 
    I was taken aback when their High Priest, David Cameron, announced 
    Britain was a Christian country.
He also described his own Christian faith in glowing terms and 
    claimed Christian values across the UK were being devalued.
This proclamation had quite an effect. More than 50 celebrity 
    atheists,  
including authors Sir Terry Pratchett and Philip Pullman, 
    performer Tim Minchin and presenter Dan Snow, signed an open letter 
    to the press claiming Cameron was fostering “alienation and 
    division” as well objecting to his characterisation of the 
    UK.  
The Muslim Council was a bit more forgiving and conciliatory in 
    their tone. They sat on the fence in other words, pointing out the 
    very obvious — that the UK would be stronger if it recognised and 
    celebrated people of all faiths and of no faith.
The backlash to the atheists’ open letter, like so many of the 
    fables laid out in the good book, was entirely predictable and came 
    from expected, powerful and very wealthy sources.
The collective, over-riding response from the God squad was one 
    of disbelief that they should be pilloried and their values 
    attacked in such a way. Honestly, you couldn’t make it up!
Me? Well, first of all I checked the calendar to make sure it 
    wasn’t April 1, and then I wondered why so many intelligent people 
    from both sides of the argument were getting so wound up about his 
    beliefs and questionable assertions, especially when it was 
    blatantly obvious that his oily words were nothing more than 
    positioning for votes from those many thousands of Christians who 
    feel religiously disenfranchised by politicians of all parties. 
Instead of getting in such a lather they should have remembered 
    the words of Edgar Allan Poe who said: “All religion, my 
    friend, is simply evolved out of fraud, fear, greed, imagination 
    and poetry.”
More appropriate, though, are the words of the great Roman 
    philosopher Seneca who said religion is regarded by the common 
    people as true, by the wise as false and by rulers as useful. 
With a general election just around the corner Cameron sadly 
    knows just how useful religion can be in an effort to keep in 
    power. I say sadly because I personally wish religion — any 
    religion — did not have such a sway on our daily lives. 
It has, at times, been the most destructive force ever 
    unleashed. Forget natural disasters like earthquakes, floods and 
    the like — Mother Nature doesn’t have a look-in. 
She doesn’t even come close when it comes to the billions of 
    deaths and suffering caused through the ages in the name of 
    religion.
I am not remotely against people who are religious, who gain 
    comfort from their faith and associated beliefs. Certainly not. My 
    late and greatly missed father was a very religious man and so are 
    many of my family. 
But if I was ever to find God there are a quite a few questions 
    I would like him to answer — the first being why he has allowed 
    such carnage and slaughter to take place? 
Woody Allen pointed out that Jesus would probably never stop 
    throwing up if he were to come back and saw what was being done in 
    his name
Thank God I’m an atheist!




