Selling vegemite to the Aussies
SCOTLAND'S tourism bigwigs want more Australians and 
    New Zealanders to come to Scotland.
They want their dollars. I mean, obviously, they altruistically 
    and proudly want to show off the very best Scotland has to offer. 
    But mostly they want their dollars.
Glasgow City Marketing Bureau and VisitScotland are sending 
    staff south to set out Scotland's stall. Being 
    Aussie-ish I feel I can help with the campaign.
The main thing to realise is that Scotland and Australia are 
    basically the same. The most common examples cited of un-Australian 
    behaviour are "serving warm beer" and 
    "charging for sauce with a meat pie." I 
    could rest my case there.
We're both heavily swearing cultures. Swearing's a way 
    of life there, as here. There's an engine oil you can buy at 
    reputable garages called Start Ya Bastard. A safe driving campaign 
    implored motorists not to be reckless on the roads by showing a 
    poster featuring a large letter W placed next to 
    a picture of an anchor.
In Australia, "bastard" is a term of 
    endearment. Visiting Australians should be prepared to be surprised 
    by particular Glaswegian terms of endearment. But, unlike our 
    Continental cousins, Australians are hardy enough to remain 
    unshocked by the coarse tongues they may encounter on Sauchiehall 
    Street.
Australians'll kid you they have a young country. What they 
    mean is it's 225 years since the English arrived. Actually, 
    the country has an extensive and fascinating history. So does 
    Scotland. It's also trying to establish itself as a creative, 
    independent force as a product of Britain and yet separate from it 
    too.
We both have a cultural cringe we're trying hard to shake. 
    We both have a strong larrikin spirit. Not to mention a love of 
    spirits; we both have a hard-wired drinking culture, ditto with the 
    shaking.
You can access Vegemite here, though it's called Marmite 
    and it's made of sterner stuff.
We have two nice bridges, the Harbour and the Forth. I'd 
    gloss over the beaches.
The only real difference is that an Aussie ordering 
    chips will expect them to arrive in salt n' 
    vinegar or ready salted flavours. Oh, and there, potato cakes are 
    deep fried. The irony.
Basically, we should be marketing Scotland as a home from home 
    but colder and a lot more damp.
I hope that's a help. And I'd be happy to tag 
    along. Just let me know.


