Some home truths for Gordon Brown, consummate 
    politician
LET urban wisdom be rewritten.
It used to be that one was never more than six feet away from a 
    rat. Today, the six-feet rule applies to crippling fuel costs, 
    reality show contestants and microphones.
The latter can always be relied on to pick up utterances and 
    bounce them homewards, particularly if they are of the embarrassing 
    kind. Just ask Gordon Brown.
The former Prime Minister and current Labour MP for Kirkcaldy 
    and Cowdenbeath thought he was far from the UK fray at an education 
    conference in Qatar.
There he was, the UN Special Envoy for Global Education, giving 
    the audience the benefit of his wisdom when he was asked to comment 
    on something "as a politician". Mr Brown 
    shot back "ex-politician" before being 
    reminded that he was, in fact, still an MP.
Well, you know what it is like abroad. A few hours in the hot 
    sun and it is so easy to forget all that stuff back home, like the 
    dentist appointment you should have made, and what you do to earn a 
    crust.
Perhaps it was the "ex" that did it. To 
    merely utter those two little letters is to conjure up Pythonesque 
    visions of dead parrots and pining for the fjords.
In Mr Brown's case, there has been a howling for blood and 
    penance. Henry Smith, a Conservative MP, says the former Chancellor 
    "can't even be bothered to turn up to 
    work" despite being paid £65,000 a year from the 
    public purse.
In the Commons yesterday, Pete Wishart, the SNP MP, asked the 
    Leader of the House how it was possible to be an MP and an 
    ex-politician at the same time. Cue chuckles all round.
On the face of it, Mr Brown's productivity rate as an MP 
    does appear more slacker than Stakhanovite. Of 883 votes in this 
    parliament, he has participated in 117 - a rate of just over 
    13%.
He has spoken five times in the Commons since 2010, on one of 
    those occasions on phone hacking. In any other line of work that 
    would make for an interesting conversation with the boss come 
    annual appraisal time.
There have been rumblings about this before, but never such open 
    attacks as have occurred this week. Three years on from defeat in 
    the General Election and leaving high office, is it now high time 
    to call Gordon into head office for a little chat about his 
    future?
The meeting could begin, as experts advise, with some 
    "reaching out" to the employee, a quick 
    moment to feel their career pain. After all, Britain is not like 
    America, where there is an established system for ex-leaders. 
    There, a President can leave office secure in the knowledge that he 
    will have at the very least a library established in his name.
Even George W Bush has a library and museum in Dallas, Texas. 
    While not quite finished - the room reserved for Iraqi WMDs remains 
    curiously empty - everything else is present and correct. 
    Presidents get to keep the title for life, too. Then there are the 
    endless invitations to speak, raising money for others, or for 
    yourself.
Contrast this with Britain, where a Prime Minister departs 
    office to the tumbril-like sound of the removal van leaving Downing 
    Street. No library, no title other than ex this and that, and 
    certainly no thanks.
In America, even disgraced presidents are afforded a dignified 
    exit. In Britain we want them to leave quickly, like bad smells.
Save for the inevitable cash-in of an autobiography and the odd 
    murmuring from the Lords, we don't expect to see or hear from 
    them again.
There have been variations on this recently, one more laudable 
    than the other. Tony Blair has out-Americaned the Americans in his 
    chase for the retirement dollar, be it for the benefit of his 
    foundations and initiatives or his extensive property portfolio.
John Major looked to be going down the traditional route until 
    his recent intervention on rising fuel costs. He took an ice age to 
    speak out (the memory of his own backseat driver, Mrs Thatcher, 
    doubtless an influence) but, when he did, his contribution was 
    telling. The boy from Brixton showed he could still teach a thing 
    or two to Eton's finest when it came to populist politics.
Mr Brown clearly thought he had found a third way. Like Mr 
    Blair, he has earned a lot from speaking and writing, almost £1.4 
    million last year, but in his case all the earnings go to 
    charity.
This noble, one might say quintessentially Scottish, behaviour 
    earned him the praise of Lord Tebbit this week, who asked his 
    fellow lords and ladies if this was not an example which might be 
    followed by other former prime ministers.
Do we even need to say yes? In taking on the job of UN special 
    envoy for global education, Mr Brown has also ensured that he has a 
    position that matters.
It may not matter as much to the likes of Mr Smith and Mr 
    Wishart as it does to the tens of millions of children around the 
    world deprived of a basic education, but it matters.
Yet Mr Brown has a problem nevertheless. No matter his standing 
    on the world stage, he remains the local MP for Kirkcaldy and 
    Cowdenbeath, even if it is notable that it is not his constituents 
    speaking out about his lack of parliamentary activity but his 
    political opponents.
There are other reasons to be concerned about Mr Brown regarding 
    himself as an "ex-politician". For his own 
    sake, and that of others, the self-imposed exile must end.
Out of office, as in office, Mr Brown appears a lost soul. 
    Unable or unwilling to do so himself, he has left the way clear for 
    others to chronicle his achievements and failings. There have been 
    precious few takers for the first task, and a line around the block 
    to do the latter.
Even his own party gives the impression of wanting him safely 
    walled up in the attic lest he walk the halls again, reminding 
    everyone on whose watch the recession began.
And with friends like Damian McBride, who needs SNP opponents in 
    Westminster?
In the recently published Power Trip, the former Labour spin 
    doctor did his best to do a Dr Crippen on what remained of Mr 
    Brown's reputation. No wonder his old boss is to be found as 
    far away from Westminster as possible.
It may be that it is too late to salvage Mr Brown's 
    reputation, that he is destined to be the Prime Minister best 
    forgotten. That would fit the tragic mould in which so many seek to 
    cast him.
Yet one wonders if Westminster and Scottish politics are so 
    blessed with giants that they can afford to ignore his talents, be 
    it in battling poverty at home or fighting to keep the Union 
    together. It does not suit Mr Brown to be above the fray, to be an 
    "ex-politician".
Politics is in his marrow, always has been, from rector to Prime 
    Minister, and public service is in his blood.
Perhaps he needs a trip home to remind him of that.


