The obesity message isn’t getting through
Being obese is not normal.
Being fat is now considered completely normal, and I happen to 
    think that is frightening.
The news came this week from the rather shell shocked top doctor 
    in the UK.
Chief Medical Officer Dame Sally Davies says many Brits don’t 
    even realise they are fat, and are also under the misapprehension 
    that their overweight children are perfectly healthy.
While I don’t think it is fair to mock people just because they 
    are overweight, it really shouldn’t become “the 
    norm” or we’re all in big trouble.
If there is a complete acceptance of people being fat then there 
    will be no incentive for those who need to lose a lot more than a 
    few pounds to do anything about it.
Dame Sally Davies has warned of appalling long term health 
    risks, including heart and liver disease, and we shouldn’t ever 
    forget the increasing burden on the NHS.
Two thirds of UK adults are overweight and more than a quarter 
    of those are clinically obese. If we don’t introduce major 
    lifestyle changes that figure will double in the next 30 years. 
    This is deadly serious.
People are eating themselves into an early grave and setting 
    their children the worst possible example.
As well as over eating we are all boozing too much. 
    Cheap alcohol means there are parents who sit at home in front of 
    the TV eating fast food and drinking cheap booze, 
    while their kids also guzzle on deep fried lard and 
    sugary fizzy drinks. Virtually their only exercise is waddling to 
    the fridge.
They are piling on the pounds but don’t seem to realise they’ve 
    a problem.
Patronising government adverts and leaflets haven’t helped, nor 
    have the horribly confusing labels on too many foods we buy, and 
    the message isn’t getting through.
We had the situation recently of a morbidly obese man being 
    outraged because he hadn’t lost any blubber despite 
    changing to a low calorie, sugar free breakfast cereal.
He genuinely didn’t seem to realise that if you pour yourself a 
    massive bowl of cereal and then slather it with giant quantities of 
    jam and cream you are never going to shed any pounds.
I did a TV show a couple of years ago when I tried to help 
    “the fattest family in Britain” to lose weight. The 
    mother genuinely thought that trifle was a really healthy food 
    because it contained fruit.
It wasn’t her fault. No one had ever sat her down and told her 
    what to feed her family.
I think we need to start teaching all of our kids at school 
    about nutrition and make it fun.
We need to get pupils doing more PE and educate them that junk 
    food should be a treat rather than a way of life.
I know there pockets of enlightenment where schools do offer 
    what used to be called “home economics” when I 
    went to school, but this is so vitally important, and potentially 
    life saving, and needs to be taken as seriously as learning to read 
    and write.
We also need to stop pussy-footing around and if 
    someone is dangerously fat. They need to be given a short sharp 
    shock by their GP and told to get themselves on a healthy eating 
    programme for life.
It’s not easy to lose weight. I yo-yo dieted for 
    years before I finally cut down on snacks and junk foods and found 
    an exercise I enjoy.
I walk almost everywhere when I am in London and I go to Zumba 
    and pilates.
I don’t deny myself good food and I love chocolate, chips and 
    cake. I just don’t eat them every single day.
Of course if people want to continue eating food that will 
    ultimately kill them that is their choice. But I have yet to meet 
    an genuinely happy grossly overweight person.
I know lots of so called “big” women who 
    celebrate their curves and are extremely happy, but although
they might be bigger than a size 16, they are well proportioned 
    and crucially they are healthy, and that is what is most 
    important.
I have painfully thin pals who are unhealthy 
    because they are underweight. They don’t eat properly and also have 
    health risks from being so skinny.
It’s all about balance, and we aren’t doing our hugely 
    overweight friends and family any favours when we say they look 
    well when they are bursting out of their clothes and panting just 
    climbing the stairs.
Being fat is not the norm, and neither is being terribly thin, 
    but instead of hand wringing there needs to be a concerted effort 
    to help people with a weight problem to help themselves.







