Charities need security to serve
What do we want from charities?
The demands and pressures have intensified as the space in which 
    they operate has grown. Expected to fill in where other services do 
    not reach, the sector has swollen in recent years as the public 
    sector has contracted.
This is most notable in the simple relationship between cuts to 
    the UK's benefits bill and the proliferation of food banks. 
    But it also applies in sectors such as health and care, youth 
    groups and housing.
Many charities are expecting to take on more work. But their 
    financial position is concerning, according to a report from 
    charity advisers BDO LLP.
As the BDO report points out, Scottish charities report growth 
    lagging well behind inflation and most have insufficient reserves 
    to last more than a few months. Many face increases in costs as 
    part of a plan to address pension deficits.
Charities have responded to a changing funding climate by being 
    leaner and more efficient, not least in order to compete for public 
    contracts.
In fact several have already been squeezed until the pips 
    squeak. Some of the bigger charities in particular have been 
    through multiple restructurings, often stripping out layers of 
    management.
This is a response to the fact that demands on charities have 
    increased while budgets have become tighter.
Such financial instability has a cost. There is a danger that 
    without security, charities become weak in key areas such as 
    creativity and innovation.
There are added pressures in England, where leading charities 
    have been criticised for helping deliver policies in partnership 
    with the UK Government that they would previously have rejected. 
    Meanwhile UK Government ministers, including Justice Secretary 
    Chris Grayling, accuse charities of "political bias" if 
    they speak out.
In Scotland the relationship with government has been more 
    harmonious. But there are still questions to be asked about the 
    "third sectorisation" of public services.
Too many charity staff are paid at relatively low levels with a 
    level of job security few of us would put up with. They cannot be 
    seen as a way for public bodies to squeeze budgets at arm's 
    length.
The biggest problem relates to the short-term funding culture 
    that plagues the sector. Many charities rely on a complex blend of 
    donations, contracts and grants from individuals and institutions, 
    none of which are guaranteed for more than a few years. Effort is 
    constantly diverted by seeking more funding.
BDO is right to raise questions about the need for charities to 
    become more business-like. The best already are. But this approach 
    can become crude. For instance, it is questionable how useful it is 
    to compare a charity's turnover per employee with that in the 
    private sector.
There are wider questions about the increasingly important role 
    charities play in society. Financial security is vital. But the 
    surest way to undermine the sector is to treat it as a way to get 
    public services on the cheap.
