Cooperatives make sense - despite Coop Bank mess
The Co-op bank has made a loss of £1.3 billion — but it’s 
    sorry. Is that alright then? Is it heck.

The mega loss was predicted when the bank failed to buy 632 
    branches from Lloyds Bank last year. That deal collapsed after a 
    £1.5 billion black hole appeared in the balance sheet.
And that happened in part because chairman and former Methodist 
    Minister, Paul Flowers, was busier buying drugs than counting 
    cash
And that happened because . . . ? Well that’s what the whole 
    debate is about now.
Did the Co-op Bank nearly collapse because the whole idea of 
    managing assets cooperatively is hopelessly woolly and happy clappy 
    — or is it quite the opposite? 
Did the Co-op bank mess up by acting like all the other 
    “big boys” when it snaffled up businesses it 
    couldn’t afford, mis-sold insurance, made mistakes and tried to 
    cover it all up?
I’d plump for the latter explanation — but Lord Myners seems to 
    disagree. 
Last week, the former City Minister resigned from the Co-op 
    Board after delivering a stinging business review. 
He said the Co-op’s membership structure “produced 
    Governors without the necessary qualifications and experience to 
    provide effective leadership” with the result that 
    directors couldn’t keep senior managers in check. In short, 
    democracy and money don’t mix.
But wait a minute. There were no elected members overseeing Fred 
    the Shred at RBS and he still made a right royal mess of things. 
    
Sure, things got sloppy at the cosy, 
    divvy-providing Co-op Bank. But no sloppier than at 
    cut-throat, competitive, mega-bonus-providing High Street Banks 
    like Lloyds and HBOS.
Co-ops are a great way to manage business, involve people, 
    create long term jobs and keep profits in the community. 
The smart Nordics know that — almost all our newsprint comes 
    from wood pulp produced by massive Finnish co-ops involving 
    thousands of farmers and foresters. It’s one reason that country is 
    doing better than us. Their instinct has always been to share risk 
    and wealth — not hog either. 
Even in “grabbit and run” Britain, the loan 
    default rate by cooperatives hasn’t been bad. Since 2000 it’s been 
    less than 3%. But the new Co-op bosses aren’t interested in the old 
    Co-operative model. 
They’ve put all 15 Co-op farms up for sale, declaring food 
    production is now “non-core” business. Wit? Being 
    “good with food” is what the Co-op’s shopper loyalty 
    was actually built on. 
But in Scotland at least, there may yet be a silver lining. Folk 
    living near one Rosemount — one of the Co-op’s three Scottish farms 
    — have set up a steering group to explore the possibilities of a 
    community buyout backed by the Scottish Government, the Land Fund, 
    other cooperative farmers and campaigners who want to cut food 
    miles and grow more wholesome food in communities. The Co-op — to 
    its credit — has agreed to talk to locals. 
If a deal looks possible they’ll consider taking Rosemount Farm 
    out of a sale that could see other farms taken over by 
    agribusiness, private equity companies, foreign nationals or 
    speculators who want land to reduce inheritance tax bills. 
Of course it’s early days. The Blair types might decide they’ve 
    enough on their plates without fund-raising to buy and manage the 
    1,000 splendid acres of Rosemount. But they might just see a new 
    cooperative dawn.
Co-op farms have always helped wildlife and biodiversity, 
    offered farming apprenticeships, college training and arranged 
    65,000 visits from school kids last year alone. Community buyouts 
    have seen local populations rise, and offered security at last to 
    folk in tied houses like farm workers. Put that together and 
    something special could be brewing out of the ruins of the 
    Co-op.
And that surely would be everyone’s cup of tea.
