From our February 14th edition
What separates people?
Miles can. Death can. Disagreements can separate one from 
    another too and have next door neighbours and close family members 
    acting as though they live on completely different planets.
Mention politics and folk go into their corners.
Try, for example, bringing up the subject of the forthcoming 
    referendum over a cup of coffee with your friends and watch the 
    room part as quickly as Moses parted the Red Sea.
Take out the pin and lob into the conversation benefit payments 
    or the amount of aid you feel should or shouldn’t be sent abroad 
    and stare in amazement as people scatter to the ends of every 
    possible argument and divide into their camps.
Religion has the same effect, which is why religion and politics 
    are commonly banned from “polite” 
    conversation.
Both subjects provoke passionate debate from their proponents 
    because they are about an individual’s core beliefs and those core 
    beliefs prompt emotions that run deep, leading to neither side 
    being particularly open to debate.
On these matters, all people tend to want to do is to get their 
    point across because to them that point is right.
And anyone who, in such discussions, tries to be more 
    reconciliatory ends up on a hiding to nothing. They will get it in 
    the neck from both sides for failing to stand on one side or the 
    other and for watering down the principles the others feel they are 
    standing so valiantly for.
The best outcome for any such discussions is for people to agree 
    to differ, but they very rarely do!
Which is why religion and politics have become taboo subjects. 
    It is safer not to talk about them. That way friendships can stay 
    intact.
Both topics, however, have a lot to contribute to the health and 
    wellbeing of us as individuals and of the communities in which we 
    live, as well as to the health and wellbeing of our nation and the 
    whole world.
When these things are not talked about, when no difference of 
    opinion is allowed to be heard, then both religion and politics are 
    open to being used in the wrong way.
Even just a quick glance at history will show political and 
    religious regimes that abused people and the world and caused 
    untold amounts of harm on so many levels through declining to 
    listen to, never mind tolerate, alternative views.
As an old advert from a well-known telephone company used to 
    say: “it’s good to talk”. But we need to talk with a 
    listening ear. We need to talk respecting the other enough to allow 
    them to hold views that, although they might differ from ours, 
    sometimes dramatically, are no less valuable than ours for all 
    that.
It is good to be passionate. It is even better when that passion 
    is peppered with the knowledge that we might, just might, be 
    wrong.
That way we have to be open to the possibility that others may 
    very well have something to say that we need to hear – Susan 
    Brown.


