We must tackle the evils of inequality

WHEN IT comes to inequality – at what point will we 
    say enough? We estimate the three richest families in Scotland now 
    own roughly the same wealth as the poorest 20 per cent of the 
    population put together. 
This stark comparison highlights the sheer scale of inequality 
    in Scotland. Such an extreme gap is not only bad for the poorest 
    and most vulnerable people in our country; there is increasing 
    evidence that inequality actually hinders economic growth too.
Even global institutions like the International Monetary Fund 
    are warning about the dangers posed by extreme inequality. As such, 
    this is not only a problem for Scotland.
Across the UK, and indeed across the globe, wealth is becoming 
    increasingly concentrated. Last year, the income of the richest 100 
    billionaires was enough to end poverty twice over. No wonder 
    President Barack Obama branded it “the defining challenge of our 
    time”.
As we countdown to the referendum on independence, people in 
    Scotland are thinking about the sort of country they want to live 
    in, regardless of the outcome. We believe the issue of inequality 
    should feature within that debate.
Between now and polling day on 18 September, we’re asking Scots 
    to take advantage of this opportunity to challenge both sides to 
    tell them how they believe we can best tackle inequality.
As such, on 25 July, Oxfam Scotland hosted an event in Glasgow 
    in which senior politicians from Yes Scotland and Better Together 
    were challenged by an audience of 150 people.
There was a welcome acceptance that levels of inequality have 
    reached unacceptable levels; that it undermines the fight against 
    poverty; and that political action is now needed.
But why does inequality matter anyway? Doesn’t wealth trickle 
    down so that everyone benefits? The evidence shows this is simply 
    not the case.
Data revealed by the Scottish Government in June showed that 
    820,000 people in Scotland are living in poverty; that’s a rise of 
    110,000 on the previous year. Some 180,000 are children. Many 
    people are forced to walk the bread line too – last year 71,000 
    people used Trussell Trust foodbanks alone – a five-fold 
    increase.
All of this means that, as a society, we are failing far too 
    many people. For us, like two sides of the same coin, poverty and 
    inequality are inextricably linked; we don’t believe there can be a 
    sustained end to poverty without challenging extreme inequality. 
    The good news is that we can close the inequality gap.
We know that inequality arises because of our economic and 
    political choices but we must move beyond recognising this to 
    actually tackling it.
Globally, there’s an opportunity to ensure that reducing 
    inequality is central to the development of the new Sustainable 
    Development Goals for the post 2015 period.
But politicians at the UK and Scottish levels cannot simply 
    stand aside. Oxfam doesn’t take a view on the outcome of the 
    referendum but we are clear that we need policies on work and wages 
    that allow people to provide for their families.
For those who are unable to work, or who can’t find employment, 
    we need adequate social protection.
We need to ensure that our public services, particularly health 
    and education, are strong tools in challenging inequality. 
But we also need a fairer redistribution of resources. The tax 
    system must ensure those who can most afford to contribute pay 
    their fair share.
And crucially, as we seek to tackle inequality the voices of 
    people living in poverty must be heard because inequality isn’t 
    just about money – it’s also about power, influence and life 
    chances.
Here in Scotland, a boy born in the most deprived 10 per cent of 
    areas has a life expectancy that’s 14 years below boys born in the 
    least deprived areas.
And this is transmitted through generations.
Women are impacted by inequality worst of all. Around the world, 
    women make up 70 per cent of those living in poverty.
We must recognise that inequality harms everyone, and that 
    tackling it will benefit us all. Momentum is growing, but political 
    rhetoric is no longer enough.
That’s why we will continue to work with our partners, allies 
    and supporters to make sure politicians demonstrate the bold and 
    courageous leadership that we all know is needed. 
