Generation sensible? No thanks
All this time, parents have been worrying about the terrible 
    things their teens are getting up to online, when in fact the 
    internet has been keeping an electronic hand on their collective 
    ha'pennies.
Fewer than 30,000 babies were born to teenage girls in England 
    and Wales last year, new Office for National Statistics figures 
    show, down from 45,000 in 2006.
You might think New Labour's Teenage Pregnancy Strategy, 
    launched in 1999, could have had a hand in it. According to 
    ­Professor David Paton of Nottingham ­University, you might be 
    wrong. "Facebook use amongst teenagers was just getting off 
    the ground in a significant way in 2007.
"Is it too much of a stretch to suggest that the amount of 
    time spent interacting virtually with friends on a smartphone has 
    led to fewer physical opportunities to engage in drinking, drugs 
    and ­underage sex?"
Well, it's not the first time social media's been 
    accused of hindering real-life connections, though the charge is 
    usually negative.
Meanwhile, a recent survey about Generation Next - those 
    currently aged 11 to 16 - has found they are a conservative young 
    bunch. For "conservative" read "boring".
Of the 3,000 young folk surveyed, the majority sought stricter 
    age limits on social vices: drinking, gambling, marriage and the 
    like. They want the vote and are engaged in politics. Anyway, 
    Generation Next comes over like a sensible, rounded, thoughtful, 
    boring bunch. I don't believe a word of it. Teenagers the 
    world over know the one immutable rule: tell the adults what they 
    want to hear. It smooths the way from adolescence to adulthood.
Raising the age of consent isn't a sign of sense - it just 
    lengthens the spell of time the vice is enjoyable. When you 
    legitimise bad things, you obliterate the fun. The joy is in the 
    forbidden. Smart move, ­Generation Next.
I'd wager many of these young people are taking part in 
    exploits their parents would regard as hair-raising. I certainly 
    hope so. Teenagerhood is for creating as much merry hell as 
    possible, in as many different varieties as possible.
There's something uniquely ­disappointing about a 
    well-behaved teenager.
For once my money's on the government strategy and 
    Generation Next putting its good sense to good use.
