The power of positive thinking
As we begin 2015, there is the customary air of gloom, 
    dread and uncertainty.
Ukraine, Islamic State, Ebola, food banks, climate change, Katie 
    Hopkins... Fear of the future is as much a part of the festive 
    season as hangovers and indigestion.
However, what we learned during the referendum campaign is that 
    positive thinking can work. If people think things can get better 
    they're more likely to want to make things better - and that 
    unleashes huge latent potential in society. Negativity just leads 
    to apathy and passivity.
So, for just one day and one column I reserve the right to say 
    that while there is no shortage of things that are going wrong, 
    there are also quite a few things that are going right.
Take, sexual and gender equality. Scotland's first same sex 
    marriages took place yesterday with little fanfare. Yet only a 
    couple of decades ago, gay people lived in fear, homosexuality was 
    illegal and gays were victimised. Fifty fifty gender balance in the 
    Scottish cabinet shows that feminism too has come of age. Young 
    people are to get the vote.
The world may be a dangerous place, but here at home we're 
    safer than ever. Crime has fallen across the board by nearly a 
    quarter in the last four years alone according to Police Scotland, 
    with violent crime falling fastest. Glasgow's booze and blades 
    culture is largely a thing of the past. The number of young men 
    convicted of crime has fallen by more than 70 per cent in Scotland 
    in a generation. Those imaginative approaches to reducing gang 
    behaviour really work.
Criminologists are puzzled by all this because crime, especially 
    property theft, normally rises in times of economic hardship and 
    recession. One contributory factor is the fall in heroin use and 
    indeed in all forms of substance abuse in the past few years. 
    Burglary tends to follow smack. Edinburgh became a burglary hot 
    spot in the 1980s when heroin gripped the city of Trainspotting.
Alcohol consumption in Scotland is also way down, by the annual 
    equivalent of 38 million pints of beer since 2009, according to NHS 
    Health Scotland. We are all drinking and smoking less, irrespective 
    of age and social class, but young people are drinking the least. 
    The percentage of under 15s who regularly drink is down by two 
    thirds and so is the number taking up smoking.
We are all living longer. Deaths from coronary heart disease in 
    Scotland fell by 12 per cent last year alone according to the 
    General Register Office for Scotland and stroke deaths were down 13 
    per cent last year too. These are quite remarkable figures. 
    Normally, medical trends move in long slow increments, but Scots 
    have transformed their life chances in the past decade and a half. 
    The risk of premature death from the big killers has halved since 
    1999.
The reasons? Boring things like health education, the smoking 
    ban, exercise, improved diet and probably most important: early 
    detection and treatment by an improving NHS, which really is 
    getting better despite all the scandals. There is a long way to go 
    of course. Scotland still has some of the worst health problems in 
    the developed world and 1,800 Scots still have heart attacks every 
    year.
A quarter of Scottish adults still smoke cigarettes, the leading 
    cause of preventable ill health. However, the emergence in 2014 of 
    Vaping shops on every high street could indicate a significant 
    change for the better. If smokers can be persuaded to use steam as 
    a delivery system for nicotine instead of toxic smoke products, 
    then health improvement will follow.
Aids, Malaria, even cancer is now being cured. In Poland, a 
    paralysed man, Darek Fidyka, was able to walk again thanks to a 
    British-funded breakthrough in cell transplantation. In America, 
    Igor Spetic became first human to have a prosthetic arm connected 
    to his nervous system so that he could feel again. I know - you 
    read about "medical miracles" every day and we 
    increasingly take them for granted. But here's something you 
    don't read about: the decline in global poverty.
Ten years ago,100,000 people marched in Edinburgh to Make 
    Poverty History. All those well-meaning folk dressed in white 
    joining hands, urging the world's governments to implement the 
    UN's Millennium Development Goal of halving global poverty by 
    2015. Well, surprising, it worked. Extreme poverty has indeed 
    halved from 2bn to 1bn ahead of schedule.
It is now possible to say that dire poverty, defined as living 
    on less than $1 a day at 1990 prices, can and probably will be 
    eliminated totally by 2030, provided that countries like Britain do 
    not cut their aid budgets. There really is no excuse.
Of course, there is still a lot of poor people around - three 
    billion live on less than $3 a day. Society is becoming more and 
    more unequal as the top 1 per cent seize an ever greater share of 
    global wealth. But the decline in the very worst 
    worst poverty has sparked a 
    revolution in longevity. India has a higher life expectancy today 
    than Scotland had in 1945.
There are downsides. The fall in poverty has been associated 
    with a rise in GDP in developing countries and this is putting 
    immense pressure on the environment. Accelerating climate change 
    remains the biggest medium term challenge to humanity. But again, 
    negativity won't stop global warming, only international 
    action combined with technological innovation.
And at least we can say in 2015 that the intellectual argument 
    if finally is over: no one seriously disputes the science of 
    climate change any more. All governments - North Korea excepted - 
    now accept their responsibility to reduce emissions even if they 
    are not living up to it. China, with a quarter of the world's 
    population is starting to clean up in a big way by investing in 
    renewable energy.
The advance of green energy has been one of the untold stories 
    of 2014. In October enough electricity was generated by wind to 
    power every home in Scotland. Huge solar farms are being built 
    across the world. Researchers at MIT have found a way of storing 
    sunlight in molecules, leading to the possibility of cheaper solar 
    panels. New batteries are being developed which can re-charge in 
    about five minutes.
It is naive to believe that there is a technological 
    "fix" for climate change but the problem cannot be 
    tackled without scientific advance and the collectivisation of 
    knowledge. Thanks to the to the 
    information revolution, society now has the capacity to make big 
    societal changes in a very short time. Look at how our working 
    lives have changed with computers. Thanks to broadband, African 
    countries can develop without having to go through the dirty 
    industrialisation that the northern hemisphere inflicted on the 
    planet.
There is every evidence that the pace of scientific progress is 
    actually accelerating. In 2014, we landed a spacecraft on a comet, 
    , gravitational waves were 
    discovered, computers learned to speak. The internet of things is 
    going to be the big story of 2015.
So, there you have it. More positivity than you can shake a 
    stick at. And not a mention of missing planes, beheadings, 
    paedophilia or any of the stuff that's dominated the headlines 
    in 2014. The one thing we can say with certainty in 2015, 
    surprisingly, is that most of us will be healthier, wealthier, 
    happier and above all safer than ever before in history.
Happy New Year.
