SNP are not a progressive party
The 2015 General Election campaign is about to begin 
    in earnest.
The result is difficult to predict but in the closing days of 
    2014 Ladbrokes offered 7/4 on Labour winning the most votes. The 
    Tories were on 1/2.
To date the polls have made grim reading for Labour in Scotland 
    but interestingly the latest Panelbase poll, commissioned and paid 
    for by the SNP, did not include any figures on the 
    electorate's voting intentions.
There is a simple explanation. The poll did not ask Scottish 
    voters how they intended to vote on May 7. Perhaps, and admittedly 
    they wouldn't be the first, the SNP only sought answers 
    designed to give succour to their troops.
The SNP are desperate to capture the Labour vote in Scotland. If 
    they are not to be regarded mainly as the preferred alternative in 
    Tory heartlands at general elections they need to park their tanks 
    on Labour's lawns.
That may be a more difficult challenge than the recent polls 
    suggest, and it may explain why the SNP's leadership is 
    flagging up the possibility of an SNP coalition with the Labour 
    party in the House of Commons to keep the Tories out of 
    Government.
Vote SNP and we could support a Labour government, teases Stuart 
    Hosie, the SNP's deputy leader and their main man (for now) at 
    Westminster in comments he made earlier this week.
To me, this smacks of cynicism at least, and hardly an argument 
    based on any driving political principle.
Since Labour will be the only alternative party able to form a 
    government, and if you despise the Tories as the SNP would like us 
    to believe they do, surely the mantra should be vote Labour to keep 
    them out.
But that will not happen. The SNP consistently fight Labour 
    because a fairer, more prosperous country is not their priority. 
    Their priority is a border between Scotland and England. That is 
    why the SNP exists.
The stakes are high at the next general election and every vote 
    not for the Labour party in Scotland, or anywhere else in the UK, 
    makes a Tory government more likely.
How can that possibly be Mr Hosie's government of 
    choice?
Mr Hosie is right, the SNP could join a government coalition, 
    and it would be up to the majority party to make sure the tail was 
    not again wagging the dog.
Hopefully, at last, the powers-that-be in the mainstream parties 
    will respond sensibly and sensitively to the political debate 
    taking place beyond the hallowed corridors of Holyrood or 
    Westminster.
Where he is not right is to suggest that the SNP would be a 
    beacon of progressive politics in Westminster unless, of course, he 
    is about to promise a change of political direction.
Mr Hosie cites Scotland's free university education as 
    evidence of progressive politics.
It is not and though the myth is repeated constantly it is no 
    truer for that. Progressive policies by almost every definition 
    involve wealth redistribution in favour of the poorest.
Simply put, a universal policy like free university education, 
    which benefits the better off to the same extent as helps the 
    poorer, is not progressive.
Indeed it should be considered regressive since it is funded at 
    the expense of around 140,000 further college places, often the 
    preferred educational option for those less inclined to go to 
    university, and often from less well off homes.
Mr Hosie is right too when he says the SNP have pursued popular 
    policies. Indeed they have but universalism comes at great cost to 
    those dependent on the services of hard-pressed local authorities, 
    the elderly who cannot afford to supplement their home help 
    provision, and the students deprived of college places.
That is the price to be paid for mistaking universalism for 
    redistributive, progressive politics.
Mr Hosie wishes progressive policies for English people too. 
    Even less reason then to risk leaving them to the mercy of a Tory 
    government.
In September the overwhelming majority of Scots voted against 
    the break-up of the UK because they understood the merits of 
    staying together.
Even if the oil price recovers the risks of breaking up remain 
    the same.
Every Scottish politician will say a fairer, more prosperous 
    Scotland is their priority.
Progressive sounding rhetoric will not pay the bills. Only 
    actions and outcomes matter. Roll on May 7.

