Time of the month to break big taboo

ONCE upon a time I was the editor of a 
    magazine.
This sounds like a glamorous job and I think if you’re Anna 
    Wintour it probably is. But I’m not, so for me there was less 
    glamour and more stress, less swanning about at parties and more 
    meetings with the advertising department. In fact, that’s what 
    there was most of: meetings.
Once, when I flopped back at my desk after a day of them, I 
    caught sight of myself reflected in my black computer screen. I was 
    wearing a shirt with a breast pocket. It was the pocket that drew 
    my eye because there in it, as had been all day, were three super 
    tampons poking up proudly like fat, Cuban cigars. No-one had 
    mentioned to me that they were there. How could they? Of all the 
    things that we are allowed to say about women’s bodies – that they 
    are too fat or lumpy or hairy – we are not allowed to mention that 
    they bleed once a month.
Menstruation is taboo. Why else would there be so many 
    euphemisms about curses and decorators and “women’s troubles”? So 
    no wonder there was a ripple of shock when tennis player Heather 
    Watson, who suffered the most unshocking of fates when it comes to 
    British tennis players – being gubbed in the first round – gave her 
    press conference at the Australian Open last week. What had been 
    the problem? “I think it’s just one of these things that I 
    have,” she said, “girl things.”
Periods! She meant her period. She was feeling dizzy and tired 
    because she was menstruating. And anyone who ever has will have no 
    problem empathising. It happens.
I have heavy, short periods. I’m usually pretty floored on the 
    first day – tired, upset stomach, sore back, sometimes sore head – 
    and every few months I’m so floored I have to go to bed with a hot 
    water bottle and some painkillers. I imagine some of you are 
    appalled by what I’ve just shared. But why? Why is the only thing 
    acceptable to say about periods absolutely nothing? How come they 
    must be hidden, not just in conversation, but physically too? 
    Sanitary products are more about discretion than anything else. 
    They are marketed mainly by how successful they are at disguising 
    the fact that we need them.
And I’m not above this. I don’t always carry my bag to the 
    toilet when I need to change my tampon, but I do try to get it into 
    my pocket as unobtrusively as possible. It’s the same when I buy a 
    box of tampons or sanitary towels – no-one ever asks me if I want a 
    bag for them. They are simply put inside a bag. After all, who in 
    their right mind would want to advertise that they need them?
But this is a madness.
Heather Watson has kickstarted the discussion about the impact 
    of menstruation on women athletes – it turns out some take the pill 
    to alter their cycle, others have injections. Annabel Croft, a 
    former British tennis No 1, revealed she used to wear a pair of 
    knickers “like a shower cap” to prevent leaks on to her tennis 
    whites.
But we should use Watson’s example to open the discussion for 
    everyone because it affects all women, not just the sporty ones.
Caravanners tow Mears off pitch
RAY Mears is the kind of man who can survive for years in the 
    wilderness with only a toothpick and a ball of twine. That’s 
    probably just as well, because if the caravanning community gets 
    its hands on him he might find himself banished into the wilds 
    forthwith.
Mears has made the fatal miscalculation of seriously offending 
    people who spend their leisure time towing their beloved 
    homes-from-home on single axles around the highways and byways and, 
    for good measure, all those who enjoy the lovely views from their 
    static vans.
OK, fatal might be overstating it – as far as I am aware, 
    caravanners are not known for their violent tendencies – but Mears 
    has hacked them off to such an extent that he’s been disinvited 
    from the Caravan, Camping and Motorhome Show in Birmingham next 
    month. Ouch.
This is a particular blow for the woodsman given that he had 
    been booked to speak at the event for a five-figure fee. They’ve 
    disinvited him from accepting that too, unsurprisingly.
What could he have done to cause such offence? He only went and 
    called caravans “hideous” on the BBC’s Room 101, claiming they 
    spoil the Devon countryside he loves and should all be painted 
    green.
Good at survival, not so good at manners.
Building blocks of genius
My 17-month-old son is struggling to get his head around Duplo 
    bricks. Every time he pulls them apart he shrieks, “Oh 
    no!” and looks appalled at the devastation caused. That 
    they stick together again has, so far, eluded him. But I’m hoping 
    that he will persist with his multicoloured baby Lego and become 
    the next Shubham Banerjee.
The 13-year-old from California has just been given funding by 
    computer giant Intel to develop a lightweight Braille printer he 
    made from Lego, called Braigo. Hope is it will go into mass 
    production. It is a fraction of the weight of a standard Braille 
    printer and, at £200, costs far less than the £1,300 conventional 
    model.
