North Sea at risk from global forces

Is the North Sea oil and gas industry now entering a period of 
    long, slow, decline? Sir Ian Wood, who has spent a lifetime in the 
    offshore business and therefore deserves a respectful hearing, 
    thinks it may well be. If it is, this may not be just peculiar to 
    the North Sea, but simply part of a worldwide trend.
Of course, in the current political climate, Sir Ian’s words are 
    highly charged. They go against what the SNP ruling administration 
    would like all Scots to believe – that there are 24 billion barrels 
    of oil remaining, that all that will be extracted, giving the 
    industry at least another 40 years of profitable life, that the 
    price will average more than $100 per barrel over the long term, 
    and that this will yield billions in tax revenues which could yet 
    persuade people to vote for independence in some future 
    referendum.
• North Sea oil is ‘winding down’, says Sir Ian 
    Wood
Lots of Scots, and not just the paid-up nationalists, appear to 
    believe that. The conventional wisdom is that the developing world 
    – China, India, Brazil, Indonesia, etc – will buy millions of motor 
    vehicles they don’t have just now, so consumption of oil will rise 
    and rise, pushing up the price.
Actually, there is growing evidence to suggest this is not how 
    things are going to pan out. Two groups of people, for very 
    different reasons, believe that global trends are turning against 
    the oil industry. And these trends, rather than local North Sea 
    problems, are why I think Sir Ian is right.
I have mentioned the first group of people in a previous column. 
    They are environmentalists who point out that if scientists are 
    right about the causes of climate change, and their projections for 
    global warming are also right, then we need to drastically cut back 
    on the amount of fossil fuel we are burning.
The campaigning organisation Scottish Environment Link has 
    produced a useful report –Scotland and the Carbon Bubble – 
    summarising the argument. Grossly simplifying, it contends that if 
    the world is to avoid a global temperature rise of more than 2°C, 
    we need to avoid burning any more than a third of the world’s known 
    fossil fuel reserves of oil, gas, and coal.
Because these reserves exist as assets on the books of 
    extractive industry companies, it means that these companies are 
    over-valued, which the environmentalists call a carbon bubble. If 
    it bursts like a house price bubble, there will be severe economic 
    repercussions, ranging from lots of lost jobs to pension funds 
    having a lot less money in them, akin to a financial crisis.
Some may think this is just scaremongering. But in fact, serious 
    people in the financial world think there may be something in it. 
    Some pension funds, particularly in Norway and Sweden, but also in 
    the UK, have begun to sell shareholdings in fossil fuel companies. 
    These are among the second group of people I referred to above, but 
    their motivations may be slightly different.
The environmental theorists reckon that co-ordinated global 
    action by governments aiming to reduce carbon emissions could cause 
    the carbon bubble to burst.
Such action, which involves taxes to increase the price of 
    carbon-based fuels, I think, is unlikely as governments of 
    oil-consuming countries are currently cheering the economic boost 
    created by cheap oil.
The environmentalists can also be criticised for laying too much 
    stress on the asset valuation of companies. Pension funds are 
    interested in the likely long-term value of companies but markets, 
    by and large, are more interested in a firm’s earnings capacity.
The current oil price slump obviously reduces an oil company’s 
    earnings and that, rather than any worries about a carbon bubble, 
    is why the value of oil firms has fallen in the last six months. 
    From the middle of 2014, Shell’s market capitalisation has fallen 
    from $238 billion to $210bn; BP from $156bn to $118bn; even 
    non-western firms such as PetroChina’s value is down from $287bn to 
    $210bn.
Another factor has begun to trouble the markets. Is the demand 
    for oil about to peak and then start declining?
At first sight, that doesn’t seem to be happening. According to 
    BP’s annual energy statistics, world consumption in 2003 was 80,216 
    thousand barrels per day (b/d) and in 2013 it was 91,331 thousand 
    b/d.
Inside those big numbers, however, are some very different 
    trends. North America, Europe, and Japan consume almost half of the 
    world’s oil production. In 2003, these regions consumed 45,699 
    thousand b/d, but by 2013 their consumption had fallen to 41,929 
    thousand b/d, an 8 per cent reduction.
Some of that has been caused by recession and high oil prices, 
    but much has been caused by greater vehicle fuel efficiency and 
    switching, particularly by bus and trucking fleets, to liquefied 
    gas fuels.
This fuel efficiency will also apply to the additional new 
    vehicles the developing world will buy, slowing their consumption 
    increase. Switching to zero-carbon and cheaper fuels, such as 
    hydrogen, may well cause global oil consumption to hit a peak and 
    start declining.
Toyota, who were first in the field with the petrol/electric 
    hybrid, have just put a hydrogen-powered car on sale in Japan and 
    it will hit the US market later this year with expressions of 
    interest greatly exciting the company. European sales may also come 
    later this year.
Analysts at Citi, a global bank, think that demand for oil will 
    peak at 92,000 – 95,000 thousand b/d some time before 2020. Others 
    have come to broadly similar conclusions. This is bad news for the 
    North Sea because it needs investment to stay in business and 
    extract the remaining resources. But the markets are asking whether 
    the big sums involved in opening a new offshore field, anything 
    between £2-4 billion, are really justified, when a conventional 
    field needs 25 years of production to earn back that investment and 
    declining demand may depress oil prices in the last half of that 
    period.
More sensibly, they think to invest in shale oil wells, which 
    cost relatively little and have a brief life of 3-6 years.
That kind of thinking is a big risk for the North Sea because it 
    may deter the investment it needs. New investment allowances and 
    reduced tax may make it a sunnier prospect in the short-term, but 
    peak demand is a dark cloud that doesn’t look like going away. 

