France will not bow to terrorism despite Charlie Hebdo 
    massacre

France will not bow to terrorism.
The massacre in France was a chilling start to 2015.
To murder people in such a cold-blooded, fanatical fashion is an 
    outrage against everything which democracy stands for.
The only heartening aspect of this tragedy is that it has 
    brought the French people together and united them to stand up for 
    what they believe in – the right to freedom of speech and a free 
    press.
To see thousands of people gathered together in solidarity in 
    the centre of Paris sends a clear message to terrorists – you will 
    not change our way of life.
In every country’s history there are defining moments. The 
    French Revolution when men and women of courage overturned the 
    monarchy and chose to become a Republic was such a moment.
Now the threat from Muslim terrorists has awakened them to the 
    need to defend the society they cherish.
I love France. It’s not just the food, the people, the culture, 
    the countryside, the elegance of French cities that I admire, it’s 
    their feisty determination to hold on to the essence of what they 
    value most.
To enjoy their two-hour lunches, their short working day, the 
    French way of life, their belief that living should be done with 
    style and dignity.
Their education system and their health care system is at the 
    heart of everything they do. It is the French way.
They are a multicultural society and have welcomed people from 
    all over the world to share their country and to enjoy its 
    pleasures.
They are proud of their intellectual debates, their journals, 
    books and libraries. This attack strikes at the heart of that. And 
    they will not tolerate it.
No religion, no dogma, sanctions the brutality of what happened 
    in Paris this week. Good will prevail.
And it is men and women of conviction, courage and decency who 
    will make it happen – by standing firm, holding a silent vigil for 
    what they know to be true – that humanity is better than this.
New Yorkers refused to be beaten after 9/11 and they stood 
    together and rebuilt a Freedom Tower in their city to define their 
    way of life.
The French, I know, will be equally defiant. 
  
