France will not bow to terrorism despite Charlie Hebdo 
    massacre

The revelations of the brutal, shameful practices, 
    sorry – enhanced interrogation techniques – the CIA used on 
    suspected terrorists should have surprised no one.
Certainly no one in the US Government. They, and with broad 
    agreement from most of their citizens, unchained the beast.
On September 11, 2001, the world changed for ever as al Qaida 
    attacked the US, killing nearly 3,000 people and leaving America 
    and its allies grieving and in shock.
The War on Terror had begun. My view at the time was that 
    revenge must be exacted on those responsible, and no stone should 
    be left unturned in our efforts to find them.
That any means, fair or foul, should be used to eradicate this 
    barbaric scum from the face of the earth. They weren’t human, they 
    were idealistic monsters who cared not a jot for the lives of 
    others, so why should we give a damn about them?
I, of course, and millions of others seeking revenge, didn’t 
    realise until it was too late that this War on Terror was flawed 
    from the start and, where the invasion of Iraq was concerned, based 
    on a complete lie.
The architects and grand schemers of it all, Bush, Blair and 
    Cheney, seemed more interested in securing Iraqi oil reserves than 
    looking for al Qaida. Afghanistan, once it had been cleansed of 
    terrorists, could again be left and forgotten about.
Trillions of dollars were spent, hundreds of thousands of lives, 
    civilian and military lost. And, for an unfortunate, mainly 
    innocent, few, an orange boiler suit and years of sustained, 
    systematic torture awaited them.
As I said no one should have been surprised at the findings of 
    the Senate report, least of all the US Government. They, with the 
    CIA, created their own hellhole, Guantanamo Bay, for many of those 
    suspected of terrorism and it’s still in use today.
The practice of rendition – flying suspects to other countries 
    to be tortured – was exposed by the Council of Europe in 2006 so 
    again, nothing really of surprise there.
What did surprise me was that it was published. No one will ever 
    be brought before the courts, no matter how guilty they are. The 
    CIA, chastened though they may be, are already at odds with some of 
    the findings, particularly the Senate’s claims that water boarding 
    and other barbaric practices did not stop future terrorist attacks 
    and save innocent lives. So why was it published?
Was it a political manoeuvre by the flagging Democrats designed 
    to embarrass Republicans? Or was it to be a baring of the nation’s 
    soul, a cringing apology for past misdemeanours in order to appease 
    those gunning for the West?
Equally, how involved in torture was our own Security Service? 
    How complicit were they? Did rendition flights refuel at 
    Prestwick?
Did Tony Blair or any of his Labour Cabinet know what the CIA 
    were doing and, if so, why aren’t we now being told? Was MI5 
    briefed about the contents before the report was published?
Given the amount of redacted text it contains there are more 
    questions that must be asked than there are currently answers 
    for.
In a week when our police were warned to hide their uniforms 
    when not on duty for fear of being attacked by jihadists, when the 
    public is given advice about what to do if they hear an explosion 
    or gun shot, in a year when soldier Lee Rigby was brutally hacked 
    to death on a London street and at a time when the terrorist threat 
    from groups like ISIS is at an all-time high – are we not entitled 
    to have those questions answered?
