Politicising armed forces must stop
THE first casualty of war may be truth, but even in 
    peace time the real facts can be hard to find when military matters 
    are involved.
This weekend in Stirling, both Nationalists and Unionists are 
    staunchly denying that the event closest to their hearts has 
    anything to do with the independence referendum.
When it was set in motion several years ago, many in favour of 
    Scottish independence may have hoped that the 700th anniversary of 
    Robert the Bruce's victory over the English forces might tilt 
    things just a little in their favour.
Likewise, the decision to hold Armed Forces Day in the same town 
    at the same time was a blatant attempt by Unionist politicians to 
    neutralise the potential political impact of Bannockburn.
Indeed, when it was announced last year, the Conservative 
    defence secretary Philip Hammond said with unusual candour that 
    Armed Forces Day would "underline the strength of the 
    Union".
As we report today, the Westminster Government is now denying 
    there is anything untoward in disseminating pro-Union 
    "information packs" to civilian and military service 
    personnel, at the same time as reminding them of the process for 
    registering to vote in the referendum.
This is in spite of the 40-year-old Queen's Regulations 
    prohibiting "all forms of political activity" in service 
    establishments.
The SNP agree with one recipient of the 'Our Place in the 
    World' material, who called it "propaganda".
The Nationalists level the serious charge that it is the 
    politicisation of the armed forces.
The Westminster Government's response is that it is not 
    politicisation, merely informing employees. The Westminster 
    argument moves from the bizarre to the frankly unbelievable when it 
    goes on to suggest that it cannot be promoting one policy over 
    another, as the government only has one policy in the area - to 
    retain the Union.
This not only ignores the Scottish Government's different 
    policy, but implies Westminster policy is forever non-political so 
    far as the services are concerned, whatever it might be.
This is simply nonsense. Promoting a particular side of the 
    independence debate is clearly political and Westminster should 
    recognise it as such.
Given their special position, it is wrong to circulate such 
    political material to the armed forces. And it would be wrong to 
    now circulate pro-independence material, even to balance the 
    argument.
Instead, Westminster should drop the pretence and guarantee no 
    further abuse of the rules designed to protect our service men and 
    women.
