Bonus culture must be challenged from the top
Is excessive executive pay gradually becoming socially 
    unacceptable?
New figures suggest a continuing downward pressure, driven by 
    concerns over shareholder value and the sometimes grotesque 
    inequalities between the best and worst paid in large companies.
The data, from shareholder research experts Manifest, shows that 
    significant minorities continue to object to controversial 
    remuneration policies at company AGMs.
Does this have an impact? It was reported in April that CEO 
    bonuses fell in April for the third consecutive year.
Almost a year ago investors were given a binding vote on future 
    pay and a single figure for each director's pay packet, with 
    the aim of aligning the company's goals with the interests of 
    shareholders.
This is not the politics of envy. There is a balance to be 
    struck in terms of market value. But in a world where a salary of 
    £100,000 puts someone comfortably in the top few per cent of 
    earners, how can it be justified that Barclays, for example, this 
    year paid nearly 500 bankers £1m each in bonuses alone?
The Manifest figures suggest a continuing anger over bonus 
    culture and disgust at a system which seemingly rewards executives 
    regardless of success or failure.
Such decisions tend to be justified on the basis of paying 
    leaders "the market rate", and that by ensuring that the 
    most talented executives do not go elsewhere, remuneration 
    committees are acting in the interests of shareholders.
It is a convenient argument, because testing it requires 
    gambling that an executive whose expectations are trimmed will stay 
    with a company. Perhaps that is a risk worth taking. For some firms 
    in the financial sector, it is a belatedly cautious attitude to 
    risk, given that the financial crisis was precipitated by reckless 
    trading.
Such vast rewards, out of kilter with any notion of performance, 
    have left the public with a sense that the imbalance between the 
    haves and the have-nots in the workplace has simply become 
    unfair.
It has become apparent that executives themselves are unable to 
    exercise pay restraint. Meanwhile banks have already found ways of 
    getting round laws to restrict bonuses.
Shareholder revolts are an encouraging sign, with a willingness 
    to challenge excessive pay having emerged in the "shareholder 
    spring" of 2012 when AstraZeneca, Trinity Mirror and Barclays 
    Bank were among those to see executive pay plans rejected.
That series of reversals continues to resonate. However it is 
    not reasonable to expect individual shareholders to continually 
    bear the burden of being the conscience of a company. Larger 
    investors must play their part.
Fund manager Fidelity has pledged to vote down policies designed 
    to get around bonus rules, while Standard Life Investments is 
    increasingly outspoken about whether large pay awards are in 
    shareholders' interests.
This is particularly welcome. What is needed is a change of 
    culture. Individual shareholders can reflect the public mood but 
    more large investors are needed to contribute muscle to go with the 
    attitude.
