Most women prisoners should not be in jail

“Tackling the situation needs more than a warm heart, 
    or warm words. It needs a different policy from the Scottish 
    Government.”
It was one of 2014’s most heart-warming stories. A student 
    raised more than £21,000 for a homeless man after he offered his 
    last few pounds so she could get home safely after losing a bank 
    card.
University of Central Lancashire art student Dominque, 22, was 
    so touched by the gesture of a young man known only as Robbie that 
    she launched a fundraising campaign to help her homeless Sir 
    Galahad find a place of his own.
In the face of austerity, zero-hour contracts, debt and despair, 
    those two generous gestures are drops in the ocean – but also vital 
    expressions of our common humanity.
Similar generosity has supported foodbanks across the 
    country.
No wonder. It’s the time of year for generosity – and with 
    Tories promising more cuts in the years ahead, it’s the right era 
    too.
But thoughtfulness is not just for Christmas.
Some caring acts are more controversial, less obvious, but just 
    as important. The call to scrap plans for a new women’s prison in 
    Greenock is one such case. The Scottish Government intends to build 
    a new, large women’s jail in Inverclyde for 350 women and will put 
    out tenders in a matter of weeks.
What of it? Didn’t a report call for Scotland’s existing women’s 
    jail in Stirling to be scrapped?
Yes indeed. In 2012 the Commission on Women Offenders, led by 
    Eilish Angiolini, called for Cornton Vale to be replaced. But 
    Scotland’s former Lord Advocate went on to say that only a small 
    prison for the tiny number of dangerous, long-term female prisoners 
    should be built.
The vast majority of female prisoners, she said, should have 
    their underlying mental health, alcohol and drug addiction problems 
    tackled in the community. Eilish stressed the point. Most women 
    prisoners shouldn’t be in jail.
That chimed with me. Four years earlier, I’d been on the 
    Scottish Prisons Commission which said exactly the same thing. We 
    had visited Cornton Vale and were shocked by what we found. One 
    young drug-using woman – due for release the next day – openly 
    predicted she’d be begging on the streets again the next day to 
    feed her drug habit. Another woman – wraith-like, quiet and serene 
    – had been admitted the previous day after a suicide attempt. The 
    sheriff decided this was the only way to find her good treatment 
    fast.
The defeated demeanour of the women inmates was shocking. Only 
    the stoniest heart could visit this epicentre of self-harm and not 
    feel compassion.
Tackling the situation needs more than a warm heart, or warm 
    words. It needs a different policy from the Scottish Government. 
    Every report has said the same thing – women on short sentences for 
    drug-related crime, including prostitution, should be in 
    rehabilitation, supported accommodation or community services, not 
    in jail.
One of the most successful “diversion” projects is the 218 
    Centre in Glasgow, which takes 500 women out of the prison cycle 
    every year and gives time and structure to help create a new life, 
    away from dependencies and the old habits of home. During stays of 
    three to six months women develop healthier habits and new 
    friendships. It’s more expensive than jail, but it works – and lets 
    women stay close to their children.
So why ignore expert advice? Why fund another women’s prison 
    instead of more projects like 218?
Former Scottish Prison Governor, Professor Andrew Coyle says a 
    new Greenock jail will be “a tragedy ... for decades to 
    come”.
At this 11th hour, it’s not too late for a rethink so 2015 
    begins as 2014 ended – with an unexpected act of compassion.
