Having to listen to stories of other people’s trips isn’t 
    exactly thrilling.
Especially those who, on the basis of one brief visit, set 
    themselves up as experts.
I don’t want to do either of these things in this column, but 
    two weekends ago I had an experience which I don’t think I will 
    ever forget. I had the opportunity to visit the Reformed Church in 
    Ukraine, a country in the throes of war where the church is much 
    more than just a worshipping community.
With inflation reducing people’s wages to half what they were 
    this time last year, Ukrainians are finding it hard to make ends 
    meet. Things we take for granted simply do not exist there. There 
    is no help for the unemployed and those who are disabled have to 
    resort to begging.
We saw round the state-run hospital in Beregszasz (Berehove in 
    Ukrainian) and my eyes were opened. The children’s clinic was basic 
    to say the least, with damp peeling walls and equipment that came 
    out of the ark.
In the maternity unit, one baby’s cot was covered in mildew and 
    we met a 13-year-old mother and a number of children who had been 
    abandoned at the hospital because their parents cannot afford to 
    care for them.
They stopped vaccinating children for eight months in this 
    hospital because they ran out of money, which is why TB is still 
    rife there.
With not a lot, the churches in this part of Ukraine are doing 
    amazing things. Poor as they are, people care for their churches 
    and outside of the services, they do their best to care for one 
    another.
We saw soup kitchens that feed people five days a week. A 
    voluntary fire brigade and an ambulance service, a second hand 
    clothes warehouse, a crisis centre, a flood response team, and a 
    bakery producing thousands of loaves a week, all operated out of 
    churches for the benefit of the wider community.
They also run schools and all parents are asked for is 15 euros 
    (£11.50) towards the children’s food as most students stay in 
    school. Most families cannot afford even that, so during October 
    congregations are asked to support the schools, not by giving money 
    because most can’t, but by providing food for the children from 
    their gardens.
What struck me most about my visit was the resilience and faith 
    of the people and their ingenuity and generosity. I have never been 
    so well fed and wonder now what they will be eating.
They were so touched that seven of us from different parts of 
    Europe should care enough about them to visit. Their only request 
    was that we might go home and tell their story and remember them in 
    our prayers.
I had taken shortbread with me and some crosses that ladies in 
    Dornoch had sewn. The small gesture of solidarity and love, brought 
    tears to their eyes. A simple, significant moment that will stay 
    with me forever.
Please spare a thought and a prayer for the people of 
    Ukraine.
