Shetland, a society at odds with itself
LAST summer, on the day that Germany walloped Brazil 
    in the World Cup semi-final, I travelled by ferry from Aberdeen to 
    Shetland in order to gauge what the islanders were making of the 
    forthcoming independence referendum.
It was my fourth visit and I was not looking forward to it. 
    Previously, I'd visited during the Braer disaster in 1993, 
    flying from Prestwick to Lerwick in a small plane packed with Tory 
    ministers and nervy environmentalists. The conditions were so bad 
    you could feel the plane being pushed back on the runway by the 
    wind and I feared the worst when, once airborne, we were hit by 
    violent turbulence.
On another occasion I went to write about a possible scandal in 
    Shetland fiddle fraternity - haud the front page! - and witnessed 
    at first hand how enclosed and incestuous life is there.
Within an hour of my landing, word had spread and lips were 
    instantly sealed. Ever since, I've felt that I'd rather 
    live anywhere than on an island where everyone knows everyone else 
    and their business.
My most recent visit did not improve my view of the place. The 
    ferry was full of drunks who, as evening wore on, grew louder and 
    more obnoxious. Mostly, they were itinerant workers employed in the 
    gas and oil industry and living in the modern equivalent of 
    hulks.
One such, the zebra-striped Sans Vitesse, is the first thing 
    that greets you as you approach Lerwick harbour. Were one looking 
    for the definition of a blot on the landscape this accommodation 
    barge fits it perfectly.
Though I had little time to spare I met a number of Shetlanders, 
    the majority of whom were dyed in the wool Better Together 
    supporters. This came as no surprise. Shetland is a law unto itself 
    which, in tandem with Orkney, has voted Liberal or Liberal Democrat 
    these past 80 years.
With reason, perhaps, for since the discovery of oil in the 
    North Sea in the 1960s, it has benefited significantly, with many 
    small villages boasting facilities such as schools and leisure 
    centres which would be the envy of many towns on the mainland. 
    Moreover, it has consistently had higher rates of employment.
You might think that such bounty would make the islanders happy 
    and lead to contented communities. This was not my impression.
As elsewhere, the referendum was divisive but on Shetland one 
    felt there was a nasty, bitter undercurrent to the debate that I 
    did not sense in other places. Though it was obvious how 
    Shetlanders would vote several told me that they would consider 
    moving to England or Norway were there to be a majority in the 
    country in favour of independence.
What was most distressing about this was the brazen selfishness 
    of those implacably against change. They were doing fine and 
    couldn't really give a damn about those of their fellow 
    citizens who were on their uppers and who, for generations, had 
    been failed by the political classes. Moreover, there was a 
    meanness of spirit and a lack of empathy.
The other issue which governed Shetlanders' thoughts was 
    that of a so-called wind farm. One afternoon I travelled up the 
    island through the area where it was to be built. It was chilly for 
    the time of year and there was a bleak beauty to the vast wild moor 
    on which on Monday this week the Supreme Court in London gave the 
    go-ahead for the erection of 103 turbines, each of which will be 
    bigger than ten double-decker buses.
It brought to an end a saga which has split Shetland much more 
    grievously than the issue of independence. To me, its advocates on 
    the island pointed not to what it would contribute to the UK as a 
    whole but what it would do for their economy and the protection of 
    services.
It was a trump card played by Viking Energy, the company which 
    will run the farm, in the justifiable belief that it would suppress 
    local opposition. It proved as effective as it was cynical. You can 
    always buy off a substantial cohort of potentially vocal and 
    influential activists by offering pitiful incentives.
The Supreme Court decision will not, however, easily repair the 
    damage done to Shetland's febrile human ecology. Sustainable 
    Shetland, the organisation which sought to thwart the introduction 
    of the wind farm, raised tens of thousands of pounds to combat the 
    imposition of this eyesore and several thousand people signed 
    petitions and contributed to the legal fund, all to no avail.
That it will take hundreds of millions of taxpayers' pounds 
    to connect the farm's output to the National Grid may yet be 
    the protesters' best hope for a stay of execution. In the 
    meantime, Shetland remains a society at odds with itself.
