Cameron’s own-goal in the North Sea
DAVID Cameron does not have a lot of support in the 
    North East of Scotland, and with his latest speech to be made 
    tomorrow he is not likely to gain any more.
North Sea oil workers and the other industries around them that 
    rely on their work will find Mr Cameron’s remarks insulting. He has 
    probably unwittingly given Alex Salmond a major boost in the May 
    elections.
Companies in the North Sea, one of Scotland’s most important 
    industries, have been laying people off. A recent Scottish 
    Parliament report suggests that the  current crisis could see 
    15,000 jobs axed from the figure of 200,000 it presently supports. 
    Not a great prospect, 15,000 more people out of work.
Yet what is David Cameron going to say to the British Chambers 
    of Commerce today? He is going to say that falling oil prices are 
    cutting business costs and that this should be handed on to workers 
    in the form of pay rises. He is to say: “That’s good for your 
    employees…” Well, not for all of them it isn’t, Mr Cameron.
But the Prime Minister’s ill-considered speech will not just 
    upset those in and around the oil and gas industry. Mr Cameron is 
    something of an employer himself. There are 121 ministers of the 
    crown, 46 government departments and over 300 government agencies 
    employing somewhere in the region of 400,000 people.
Those in the public sector have seen pay rises of 1.2 per cent 
    according to government figures, some way behind the 2.2 per cent 
    pay increase seen in the private sector. So, one would imagine that 
    Mr Cameron’s own employees will be expecting his words to mean that 
    they too can enjoy a little boost in their pockets. But then where 
    is this going to come from as we are continually being told that 
    Britain must continue to pay down its debts and that the age of 
    austerity is not over?
The people who will be most annoyed and frustrated with Mr 
    Cameron’s speech will be those thousands of people in Britain who 
    run a business, from the smallest to the largest, and there are 
    many more individuals in the small business category. These are 
    generally people who have struggled to make it through the 
    recession, a massive crippling recession brought on by the 
    inability of previous governments to properly restrain the greed of 
    big bankers with effective regulation. They were once properly 
    regulated, but that was relaxed.
So the business people that have survived have worked hard, dug 
    in and persevered with their businesses. Much of the motivation for 
    that will have been to ensure they kept paying their taxes, what 
    with HMRC having become so adept at winding up businesses that owe 
    them.
Now, that generous Mr Cameron has raised the expectations of 
    every worker by saying that Britain’s bosses can afford to give 
    them a pay rise. The Prime Minister gets to break the good news and 
    pay no part of the cost. Are businesses not supposed to be the 
    Tories’ natural bedfellows?
