Academy gathers to remember Matthew
THE words “truly inspirational” can be aimed at only a select 
    few in our community, but rarely anyone as young as 16. However, 
    that is the badge of honour which has been pinned on Matthew 
    Campbell this week.
A touching remembrance service at Elgin Academy paid a fitting 
    tribute to the teenager who succumbed to cancer, which he had 
    battled since the age of two.
Matthew was described as caring and courageous, a lad who was 
    destined to achieve his ambition of going on to study medicine – 
    and he had achieved so much already in his short life.
A keen musician, he played the cello, enjoyed dance, badminton 
    and orienteering, took part in the Duke of Edinburgh’s Award 
    scheme, was a volunteer in the local community, had been the S5 
    school dux and gained five A passes in his exams.
The commitment, perseverance and positive attitude that was 
    serving him so well in his life and studies, stood him in good 
    stead during his hospital stays and through courses of treatment. 
    He was “truly inspirational” to his family, his friends, his fellow 
    students and others whose lives he touched.
Academy head teacher David Barnett said Matthew always had a 
    smile on his face, and would be remembered with great affection, 
    admiration and respect.
So many qualities for one so young. Hopefully, the many tributes 
    will offer comfort to his family following their tragic loss.
A shocking 
    blighton our society
THAT 24 people in Moray have been reported for domestic abuse 
    related offences between December 24 and January 5 is a shocking 
    figure for such a short period. Sadly, for some, it was not 
    entirely unexpected.
The police had warned about the issue in the run-up to the 
    festive period, and Moray Women’s Aid, which runs a refuge in 
    Elgin, spoke to the ‘Scot’ last month about problems that surface 
    at this time, and throughout the year. A crackdown was promised by 
    police acting on information, other cases came to light, and now we 
    have the results.
Domestic abuse is, of course, abhorrent and unacceptable. It is 
    an attack of defenceless, vulnerable women – in some cases men – 
    and has repercussions for children who see and hear words and 
    actions to which the young should not be exposed. The effects can 
    stay with them for a lifetime, leaving emotional scars.
The issue is thankfully treated much differently from years ago, 
    some say it is taken more seriously. It is better understood, and 
    from being a silent crime, committed behind closed doors and 
    curtains, it is now brought out into the open for discussion, with 
    warnings to offenders shouted out loud and clear.
Moray Women’s Aid does a wonderful job, a vital job, and its 
    refuge deserves the full support of the community in continuing to 
    provide shelter and comfort to victims and children, helping them 
    get their lives back on track.
It was a happy Christmas and New Year for most people, but 
    obviously not all. However, if victims and families know that they 
    can call on help in their hour of need, that should provide a 
    little comfort. And the bullies should know that they won’t get 
    away with it and that they will pay for their actions.
What can you do to help youth groups?
WE HAVE a wide range of youth groups in Moray, many of which 
    depend on adults for help and supervision. At the start of a new 
    year, we should take time out to consider if we can lend 
    assistance. Elgin Youth Café is sending out a call for volunteers, 
    and as a project that does much to enhance the lives of our young 
    people, it deserves a response.
Give the appeal some thought, and if not the youth café, see how 
    you can maybe lend support to another youth group in your 
    community. A little help can make a big difference.
