It is often said women face a glass ceiling in the 
    workplace, but the reality is there is more than one.
So profound and widespread is the structural sexism in many 
    British workplaces that women will often break through one ceiling 
    only to find another above it and another above that one. There has 
    been progress in making the workplace equal, but it has yet to go 
    all the way to the top. The final ceiling has still to be 
    broken.
Academia is a good example. Go into any lecture hall nowadays 
    and the students are very likely to be about 50/50 male and female. 
    The lecturer at the front of the class is also just as likely to be 
    a woman as a man (women now make up about 45 per cent of the 
    academic workforce and in some departments they are in the 
    majority). In other words, on the lower rungs of the campus, there 
    has been good progress.
The real problem lies at the top of academia where, in some 
    disciplines, it can look like very little progress has been made at 
    all. Nearly half of the staff at universities may well be female, 
    but the higher you go, the lower the female proportion of staff is 
    likely to be. As The Herald's new figures show, by the time 
    you reach the level of professor, there are on average just under 
    22 per cent of women.
Perhaps it is a little unfair to single out universities for 
    criticism when the court room and the board room, and our 
    parliaments, have exactly the same problem. There has also been 
    some slight improvement on campuses: the most recent figures are 
    some three per cent better than they were four years ago. But 40 
    years after the Sex Discrimination Act and five years after the 
    Equality Act specifically required employers to eliminate gender 
    inequality, there is no excuse for the fact that such a low 
    proportion of our leading academics are women.
The explanation lies in a form of structural sexism, which is by 
    no means unique to universities but makes it easier for men to 
    progress up the ladder than it does for women. Academics are 
    increasingly expected to work long days, their hours and conditions 
    are generally inflexible, and there is considerable pressure on 
    them to do more research or publish more papers in order to win 
    promotion, and all of that contributes to the gender imbalance.
Such an inflexible, long-hours culture will suit some women just 
    fine, but it is particularly hard on those with work and family 
    responsibilities. In an ideal world, men and women would share 
    childcare evenly, but until that happens, employers must make it 
    easier for women to combine childcare and work which means more 
    job-sharing, more crèches, and 
    more flexibility over where and when staff work.
In some areas, universities will find it hard to act alone as 
    there are some deeper cultural influences at work. In science and 
    engineering for example, the fact that the number of female 
    professors is among the lowest reflects wider prejudices and 
    attitudes that see girls drop out of such subjects long before 
    university. The fact that so few leading figures in science and 
    technology are female also means that there is a lack of role 
    models to inspire young women to become involved, and so the cycle 
    goes on.
Scotland's universities have been making some advances - 
    and in some areas they are performing better than the rest of the 
    UK (the proportion of female principals for example is double that 
    of England). But it remains a concern that progressing to the top 
    of academia is harder for women than men and that will only change 
    if there are profound reforms to the culture and structure of our 
    universities.
