Gauguin, but not for a song
The art world's eyes were watering last week when 
    a work by Paul Gauguin sold for a record $300m, or £197m, the 
    highest sum ever paid for a painting.
It was not just experts and collectors who felt emotional, 
    though. The gallery in Basel, where Gauguin's portrait of two 
    Tahitian women, titled When Will You Marry, or Nafea Faa Ipoipo, 
    had been hanging, would also have shed a tear. Not only was it 
    losing this gem, but the Swiss owner of the collection it was part 
    of had fallen out with it and removed all the works on loan to the 
    gallery in search of a better home.
Though it has not yet been confirmed, it is widely assumed that 
    the painting was bought by Qatar Museums. Certainly, the kingdom of 
    Qatar has made headlines in recent years for the fortune it is 
    prepared to spend on Western art, such as the then-record £158m 
    reportedly paid for Cezanne's The Card Players in 2011, and 
    £93.5m for a Francis Bacon. Before his death last year, Sheikh Saud 
    bin Mohammad al-Thani, former minister of culture, is thought to 
    have spent around £1bn on art works for his nation. Clearly, his 
    legacy lives on.
Astronomical figures such as these are reminiscent of the tulip 
    mania of the 1600s, catapulting art into the realm of modern 
    football, where the prices paid for players are equally 
    mind-boggling. But at least with sport one can accept the argument 
    that players deserve a fair cut of the revenue raised by television 
    rights, sponsorship and gate. One wonders, though, how any gallery 
    or museum can justify this kind of expenditure. The buyers' 
    calculation of intrinsic worth can have nothing to do with the 
    simple arithmetic of the number of visitors famous works will 
    attract, and how much they can be charged to get through the 
    turnstile.
For many of us, thinking of a painting in terms of pounds and 
    dollars is cheapening, turning art into a base commodity rather 
    than a brilliant exercise in self-expression. It feels vulgar and 
    wrong to look at a canvas and imagine what was paid for it, as if 
    this subtly makes it more impressive. Art lovers take as much 
    pleasure in a good painting that costs a few hundred pounds as in 
    one priced in millions. A work by Peter Doig, which might set you 
    back £7m, is no more beautiful or interesting to my eye - talented 
    though he is - than a Raeburn or Bellany worth a fraction of that. 
    Nor does the £74m paid a couple of years ago for Edvard 
    Munch's The Scream make it any more or less fascinating than 
    when it sat drying on the easel, long before it was heralded as an 
    emblem of the nihilistic age.
For Qatari buyers, however, the stakes are even higher than the 
    sums they are prepared to pay. The actual painting is in some ways 
    irrelevant, other than the kudos it will bring. In this respect, 
    £197m is nothing when set against the importance of establishing 
    Qatar's cultural credentials and attracting international 
    prestige and visitors. For the richest country on earth, such an 
    outcome is presumably priceless. Yet the effect of record-breaking 
    prices on the art world is not just unsettling but unstabilising, 
    inflating the market in artworks beyond their natural price.
Of course, it is hard to define what a reasonable price for art 
    might be. As The Two Roberts exhibition at the Scottish National 
    Gallery of Modern Art in Edinburgh shows, fashion rather than 
    intrinsic quality greatly influences what people will pay, and 
    when. One day MacBryde and Colquhoun were favourites of the 
    galleries; a few years later, their canvasses were stacked, 
    unwanted, against the studio wall, while they struggled to pay 
    their rent.
Which brings us back to Gauguin. Like so many of his kind, he 
    died in poverty, his work not appreciated as it deserved until long 
    after he had gone. Rembrandt, arguably the greatest painter ever 
    born, died without a penny, as did Vermeer and El Greco. Worst of 
    all was Van Gogh who in his lifetime sold only one of his paintings 
    (for about £70), and died not just a pauper but insane.
The gulf between artists' lives and the egregious price 
    tags on their masterpieces is sobering. The image of the starving 
    artist in the garret is not the figment of a romantic imagination, 
    but a grim, unglamorous truth. Even today, none but the most 
    popular artists does more than scrape by. Meanwhile, in auction 
    houses and galleries and in the vaults of private collectors, 
    canvas has become a new currency, one tainted even more than most, 
    it seems, by greed, delusion and power.
