Cameron could join the teenage fanclub

Legislation to enable 16- and 17-year-olds to vote in 
    Scottish parliamentary elections should become law soon. Excellent, 
    it has long been an anachronism that the ability to vote has been 
    denied to this age group. But why stop at just these 
    elections?
The case for allowing these teenagers to vote has long been an 
    overwhelming one. A 16-year-old can leave school, get a job, pay 
    taxes, get married, have children, join the armed forces, in fact 
    almost everything that every other citizen aged 18 or over can do – 
    except vote for a government or a local council.
If they are trusted with all these rights and responsibilities, 
    why on earth can they not be trusted to use the right to vote 
    responsibly?
The fact that they can, of course, be so trusted was recognised 
    at last year’s independence referendum. All the evidence is that 
    they took the privilege seriously, engaged in the debate and with 
    the arguments, and voted in huge numbers according to their own 
    conclusions about the issue just as responsibly as everyone else 
    did.
So now the UK government is to recognise that and Scottish 
    16 and 17-year-olds will be able to 
    vote at the Scottish Parliament elections in 2016 and presumably at 
    local authority elections as well. But the UK government is not 
    legislating to allow them, or teenagers in the rest of Britain, the 
    same privilege at the next general election due in May.
Why could that be? After all, the Westminster air is thick with 
    talk of this now being a zombie parliament with next to nothing to 
    do. Debating and legislating on this issue would be an extremely 
    good use of this otherwise wasted parliamentary time.
Perhaps it is because the Conservative party is alone amongst 
    the major parties in not supporting such a move. To say they oppose 
    it would perhaps be too strong – David Cameron tends to say that he 
    cannot see an overwhelming reason for changing the status quo.
Could it be that he fears that the Labour and Liberal Democrat 
    parties, but not the Tories, would benefit at the ballot box? It 
    seems the most likely explanation, but if it is, it is rather a 
    short-sighted one.
Gaining electoral advantage was one reason that many people 
    believed the SNP was in favour of extending the franchise at the 
    referendum. Surveys have consistently shown that younger people 
    were more likely to vote SNP than older generations. But analysis 
    of results suggest that 16- and 17-year-olds voted, albeit fairly 
    narrowly, against independence.
And surely, since Mr Cameron has tried his best to show that the 
    Tories are a rather more progressive political force than their 
    opponents depict them, seizing the initiative on lowering the 
    voting age would be an extremely good piece of evidence to prove 
    the Tories’ claim to modernity. We need young people to engage in 
    the political process, it is for the benefit of everyone, and 
    having a vote is required for that.
‘Action’ call for Scottish films
Scottish Screen was merged with the Scottish Arts Council to 
    form Creative Scotland with many fine words about how the new body 
    would promote excellence and quality in all cultural and artistic 
    forms, and be leaner and fitter for the job than the two 
    predecessor bodies.
Actually, say Scotland’s producers of film, it has turned out to 
    be none of these things as far as cinematic art is concerned. 
    Making films can involve expensive buildings such as studios, which 
    necessitates involving Scottish Enterprise and, according to the 
    film-makers, getting a business and an arts quango to collaborate 
    has proved impossible. And although Creative Scotland has a 
    director of film and has a published strategy for encouraging it, 
    not much money to support productions has come out of it.

Let’s be frank, merging the two arts bodies five years ago had 
    little to do with enhancing achievement in any art form, and a lot 
    to do with meeting manifesto commitments to cull quangos and save 
    some money. Since film (quite wrongly) tends to rank below theatre, 
    the written word, and painting in most people’s estimates of 
    Scottish artistic excellence, it was odds-on that it would suffer 
    in the way the producers say it has.
The lack of priority given to film cannot be because its output 
    is second-rate. The list of successful films, screen actors, and 
    directors that Scotland has produced is too long to list here. And 
    it brings an economic bonus that few other art forms can boast of – 
    tourists trekking to the locations of their favourite movies.
The producers have made a good case for an agency dedicated to 
    supporting them. Politicians should be listening and taking 
    notes.
