Bank scandals breeding new politics
Reading about the HSBC tax evasion scandal, for a moment I was 
    just stunned. Very rapidly, I became angry. This hitherto respected 
    international bank engaged in a criminal conspiracy to help rich 
    people not just avoid, but to evade tax. Not just millions, but 
    hundreds of millions, maybe even billions. And hardly anyone in 
    Britain has been brought to book over it. For a moment, I wanted to 
    become a revolutionary and get after these people with a 
    guillotine.
An emotional and extreme reaction? Only a bit, I think, for I 
    believe what HSBC was doing is as corrupt and corrosive to society 
    as drug-dealing which, incidentally, they are also accused of 
    helping.
And the failure of politicians and prosecutors to do much about 
    it also exemplifies what’s wrong with our political system and why 
    people are so attracted to voting for non-establishment parties, 
    from our own SNP to Syriza in Greece.
It is difficult to summarise the depravity of what HSBC was up 
    to. Essentially, the Swiss subsidiary it bought in 1999 used Swiss 
    banking secrecy laws to operate as “a tax avoidance and tax evasion 
    service” to quote a former HMRC tax inspector on the BBC TV 
    Panorama programme. A good number of the Swiss subsidiary’s 
    estimated 7,000 British customers used its secrecy to hide money 
    and assets from the taxman.
This was not just making use of legal loopholes to avoid paying 
    tax, but illegal tax evasion. While holding a foreign bank account 
    is perfectly legitimate, failure to tell the taxman what it earns 
    is illegal.
Moreover, according to the world-wide media grouping which has 
    acquired the information: “Other clients of HSBC now turn 
    out to be unsavoury characters, attracted by the secrecy. Evidence 
    exists that some may have been smuggling drugs, handling bribes, 
    committing fraud, helping to finance terrorists, or looting their 
    own countries.”
In what way is this different from the BCCI scandal – the bank 
    which offered insanely high interest rates which persuaded 
    unfortunate bodies like the Western Isles Council to deposit money 
    in it only for it to be lost when it collapsed – and which became 
    known as the Bank of Crooks and Conmen International?
It too pursued the kind of high net worth individuals and 
    dictators such as Saddam Hussein who took advantage of its 
    services, also operated from banking secrecy domains, such as 
    Luxembourg and the Cayman Islands, and happily laundered drug 
    cartel and terrorist money.
