Religion not the answer for legal needs
The horrific and random consequences of the tragic bin lorry 
    accident in Glasgow might challenge the existence of a loving and 
    just Deity. Further, the massacre in Paris carried out in the name 
    of religion might incline some to regard religion as a force for 
    evil as much as for good. Certainly, the French satirical magazine, 
    Charlie Hebdo, is reported to have had little good to say about 
    organised religion. 
It might be of interest therefore to consider the relationship 
    between religious belief and Scots law today and the extent to 
    which the Bible or other books of religion may be regarded as a 
    source of law.
In some cases the Bible has been adopted directly into Scots 
    law. For example, the crime of incest was long governed in Scotland 
    by the Incest Act 1567 which defined the crime with reference to 
    its proscription in the Book of Leviticus at chapter 18. In a 2008 
    case a court held that particular conduct which had been carried 
    out prior to 1986 did not constitute the crime of incest 
    notwithstanding that it fell within the definition in Leviticus. On 
    appeal, the court was directed to apply that definition. In 1986, 
    Parliament saw fit to supersede with a modern definition the words 
    of Leviticus which, however, remain the authority for conduct 
    carried out before that date.
We find also that Scots law and legal practice are littered with 
    biblical authority. The giving of evidence in legal proceedings is 
    routinely subject to the swearing of an oath before Almighty God. 
    Among the many biblical authorities for doing so there is 
    Deuteronomy 6:13: “Fear the Lord your God, serve him only 
    and take your oaths in his name.” Of course, nowadays we 
    have the alternative to the oath of making a formal affirmation 
    which has the same legal effect of exposing untruthful testimony to 
    prosecution as perjury. The independence of the judiciary, 
    Deuteronomy 1:16 and the rights of the disabled, Leviticus 19:14, 
    are supported by biblical authority.
The recent and ongoing debate about the requirement for 
    corroboration in criminal prosecution may be enlightened by 
    Deuteronomy 17:6: “At the mouth of two witnesses, or three 
    witnesses, shall he that is worthy of death be put to death; but at 
    the mouth of one witness he shall not be put to death.”
One of the most famous judicial cases of all time, Donoghue v 
    Stevenson 1932 (the snail in the bottle) appears to have been 
    decided with reference to biblical ordinance. Lord Atkin, in the 
    leading judgment, found that the defender was obliged to “love thy 
    neighbour”, Mathew 22:25-40 and therefore owed him the duty of care 
    which went on to form the basis of the law of negligence in many 
    western jurisdictions.
I have recently had issue with professional colleagues as to 
    whether witnesses should be excluded from hearing other evidence in 
    a case before they give their own evidence.
I found the Book of Susanna 48–64 to be instructive. Two elders 
    lusted after Susanna, but in vain. Out of spite, they jointly 
    accused her of adultery committed with a young man in her husband’s 
    garden. She was about to be convicted when Daniel asked: 
    “Have you condemned a daughter of Israel without learning 
    the facts? Separate them (the witnesses) far from each other and I 
    will examine them.” Daniel then asked the first witness: 
    “Under which tree did you see them being intimate with each 
    other? The witness answered: “Under a mastic 
    tree….” Daniel then examined the second witness who 
    answered the same question: “Under an evergreen 
    oak…..” Susanna was freed and the witnesses were convicted 
    of bearing false witness. Of course, inconsistency between 
    witnesses is not proof of perjury. It is for the judge or jury to 
    determine the significance and consequence of the inconsistency.
While there may well other precepts of the Bible or of other 
    religious works which await realisation in our law, there would 
    appear to be some danger in their formal recognition as 
    repositories of law.
