CfE could learn from newspaper design
Like many others I have been critical of the designers of the 
    Curriculum for Excellence for relying on vast lists of pupil 
    outcomes and experiences. Instead I advocate the use of a few 
    abstract “high concepts” which are easy to remember and can support 
    learning across subjects. Let me exemplify the method through a 
    design “rule of thumb” which many have found useful in their own 
    media learning and teaching.
It is usually referred to by the memorable acronym “Crap” coined 
    by Robin Williams (not the late actor). In her classic The 
    Non-Designer’s Design Book she identifies contrast, repetition, 
    alignment and proximity as the key principles required for 
    effective design of page-based texts such as print ads, newspapers 
    and magazines. The contrast principle requires different content 
    elements to look different. Repetition gives a sense of 
    compositional unity to a page or group of pages. Alignment means 
    every page element should be aligned with another. Proximity means 
    items which belong together should be in integrated visual 
    units.
Consider the front page of The Scotsman. Unless there is an 
    exceptional story, the elements are organised using a modular grid. 
    These are: the masthead which acts as The Scotsman brand; teasers 
    which highlight content items; the lead story and a pair of”wing” 
    stories; an index strip at the foot. Contrast is evident in 
    different font sizes for headlines, subheads and copy and in other 
    visual cues such as different line lengths for the lead and wings 
    and different background colours for the teasers. Teaser background 
    colours may be symbolic of content eg. 
    maroon for Hearts and green for Hibs. But often the designer will 
    pick up a colour in the front page photograph, thus helping to 
    unify the whole page.
Colour “rhyming” is an example of repetition which can be used 
    across the whole newspaper. Other repetitions are the use of the 
    Coranto typeface for the headlines and news stories. If you look 
    closely you may notice that the Coranto font in the headline has 
    similarities as well as subtle differences to the masthead font. 
    Coranto is a serif font – the letters end with fine strokes. This 
    contrasts with the sans serif (without serif) font used in the text 
    beneath the masthead (date, slogan ie. 
    “Scotland’s National Newspaper”, price and web address), in bylines 
    and in jump-lines which tell the reader where the story 
    continues.
Alignment helps the eye quickly scan and differentiate content. 
    Notice the vertical alignments at the left and right of the front 
    page. Note how the fully justified text produces vertical gutters 
    between columns within the same story and how vertical and 
    horizontal rules are used to separate stories.
Proximity is evident in the content of the four bands as well as 
    in the juxtaposition of headline, image and copy in the news 
    stories.
Effective newspaper design is invisible in that it gives the 
    reader effortless access to the content. Yet the design has to be 
    visible and distinctive so potential readers can quickly select 
    their favourite newspaper from competing titles on the 
    newsstands.
In order to design their own publications, pupils first have to 
    look beyond the informational, persuasive or entertainment content 
    and notice how content has been designed to gain readers’ attention 
    and convey meaning. I have illustrated this using this newspaper 
    but the same principles can be seen in any publication. One can 
    introduce young pupils to design principles using storybooks, film 
    posters and comic strips. Rather than use abstract terms such as 
    “contrast” one can pose questions which prompt children to deduce 
    how a story has been designed to appeal to the audience. For 
    example: Look at the size of the hero and the monster. Why has the 
    artist made them that size? Once pupils have answered such 
    questions they have started to develop the skills necessary to 
    design their own stories.
The power of Williams’ principles lies in their simplicity and 
    broad applicability. High concepts possess simplicity and power. 
    They give learners a firm footing for the many steps that follow. 
    Leonardo da Vinci allegedly wrote: “Simplicity is the 
    ultimate sophistication.” Many teachers had hoped for 
    simplicity and sophistication in the Scottish curriculum. Alas, all 
    we have is a vast Heath Robinsonesque guddle.
