3. Method and Outline
To create a structure from which to explore how we might come to 
    say the things we do in qualitative interviews (arguably the 
    artifacts of such conversations) and what, in turn, might be 
    inferred from the content of such narratives, I concentrated 
    specifically on writings about collective memory: Recruited for the 
    key protagonists were: Maurice Halbwach’s, The Collective 
    Memory (1980), On Collective Memory 
    (1992) [16,17]. Added to these were cameo but relevant roles to be 
    played by components of Paul Ricoeur’s, Memory, History, 
    Forgetting (2004), James Wertsch’s (2002) concept of 
    collective remembering and Bakhtinian (Bakhtin, 
    1986) notions of speech genres [18–20]. The method which unfolded 
    symbolizes a promiscuous polymathery on my part and, from the 
    outset, I acknowledge that liberties may have been taken with the 
    scholarship of others to create an interpretative framework. 
    Structured interdisciplinary reading inevitably transfigures the 
    material on which it has drawn. Consequently, for specialists in 
    the original canons, its results often seem lacking in rigour and 
    thus intellectually irritating. However, the emphasis in this paper 
    is on the transformation of the components into a slightly 
    different whole through their interweaving. To explore the 
    implications of these interwoven readings, what follows is divided 
    into the following sections:
- A theoretical methodology that draws together: the nature of 
    our qualitative data around learning and teaching, the concept of 
    collective memory, evidence of the limited geography in which we 
    come to construct narratives about pedagogy and instruction, and 
    the potential to identify particular speech genres within the 
    data-sets. This means that to understand how our stories are 
    constructed we need to combine the social theorizing of Halbwachs 
    and Ricoeur, with the anthropological observations of Wertsch, and 
    Bakhtin’s concept of speech genres. In the interpretative dialogue 
    between these works, four closely mingled assumptions about what 
    might be present in qualitative data related to learning and 
    teaching emerges: Firstly, stories of significance (even if 
    apparently mundane) are recalled in interviews; secondly, we 
    re-member (recollect, recognize ourselves and others, and 
    re-materialize) the teaching context when we reflect on what we 
    consider to be important about the links between teaching and 
    learning in such interviews; thirdly, 
    re-membering involves not only our individually 
    separable perceptions and experiences but, via the process of 
    recall, also the framing of them through an interaction with a 
    culturally shared repertoire of concerns, sentiments, and 
    problem-solving approaches that link us to our disciplinary 
    predecessors as well as current colleagues; fourthly, and 
    consequently, that the concept of collective 
    re-membering, predicated on the “irreducible 
    tension between active agent and cultural tool” [19,21], is a 
    pragmatically useful interpretative device when considering our 
    findings. As a result of such a theoretical methodology, it is 
    asserted that the phrase collective re-membering 
    is of more use than collective memory when we consider our present 
    teaching stories.
- Two short case studies which illustrate the implications of 
    the theoretical methodology when exploring the types of stories 
    Humanities’ lecturers seem to build and maintain in conversations 
    about aspects of their teaching: Firstly, myths about 
    transformational reciprocity in our discussion of research-teaching 
    linkages and, secondly, saints’ lives or sagas of inattention and 
    suspicion around institutional-level educational agendas such as 
    employability and global citizenship (particularly referred to 
    collectively in the UK and Australia under the rubric of “graduate 
    attributes’ agendas”). These examples present story categories that 
    emerged whilst I undertook two qualitative research projects around 
    how research-teaching linkages and graduate attributes respectively 
    currently operated within the Humanities [14,15] and a brief 
    reference to each of the data-sets introduces the case studies 
    purely to establish the scene. Whilst by no means the fulcrum of 
    this paper, the gathering and interpretation of these projects’ 
    related data represent the back-story of the more theoretical 
    discussion outlined here.
- A final section raising the question of whether we erect and 
    excavate simultaneously the wrong stories in our 
    current designs of qualitative research when studying learning and 
    teaching. This section concludes that it would be better to 
    cultivate different types of narratives within the research process 
    (particularly those being used by lecturers in the disciplines to 
    understand teaching practices). If we want to capture the nuances 
    of our experience as academic teachers of the Humanities, we 
    actually need to shift the narratives/narrative resources on which 
    we have come to depend when talking about learning and teaching.
In the spirit of storytelling and deliberate playfulness that 
    lay behind this article’s first outing as a conference keynote, I 
    have also pressed Herodotus into service to provide illuminating 
    metaphors. I have thus co-opted his description of Babylonian 
    customs to emphasize or elucidate points. I ask my readers, 
    therefore, to imagine they are travelling along the Euphrates to 
    Babylon, where a river of interpretation runs through a city built 
    from the fired bricks of primary and secondary sources.
4. Theoretical Methodology: Unravelling the 
    Narrative
4.1. Plot 1: Excavating the Emic Foundations of Our 
    Stories: Bringing Qualitative Data together with the Concept of 
    Collective Memory
Forms of qualitative inquiry, with narrative at their heart, 
    dominate the higher education (HE) learning and teaching landscape. 
    The prominence of the single, semi-structured interview is embedded 
    across the journals which deal with higher education practice-based 
    research. In particular, over the last decade, a significant amount 
    of emic material has been recorded and analyzed 
    in terms of the outcomes of research-teaching linkages across 
    Anglophone and European universities [22]. The Humanities have 
    certainly not been immune to this trend [14,23]. Through our 
    conversations with and as educational developers 
    and researchers we have arguably been reflecting back local 
    customs, meanings, and beliefs, rather than illustrating our 
    material practices and how these might be contradictory or 
    dissonant to our narratives about those practices [24]. These 
    conversations are only concerned with communicating the meanings we 
    ascribe to our actions, harmonizing ideal and experience and giving 
    only one side of an insider’s view [25]. Through them we tell our 
    stories.
Additionally, the ascription of meaning is part of the constant 
    dialogue between individual memory and the socio-cultural tools 
    which help in its formation. As Ricoeur observes, “it is 
    essentially along the path of recollection and recognition that we 
    encounter the memories of others” ([18], p. 120). Our stories tell 
    of how we make meaning of teaching situations and in so doing 
    generate recollection, recognition, and thus to a certain extent 
    re-materialization through conversation. Our recall of such stories 
    in interviews is thus in part informed by collective (and in this 
    case, often disciplinary) memories. With regard to making meaning 
    of current learning and teaching situations and what we value as 
    important, this suggests the possibility of uncovering a shared 
    repertoire of concerns, sentiments, disciplinary morality, and 
    phraseology that links our narratives to the past. In effect, it 
    suggests a Halbwachs-like underlying mechanism operating between 
    our contemporary experience and that of our disciplinary 
    predecessors. Thus, what we say in qualitative interviews is a 
    location not only for the excavation of our individual story but 
    also the collective re-membering retained in the 
    story. Our transcripts hint at the past beyond our immediate 
    experience, expanding the time-frame in which the story was 
    generated. (Reflecting on Halbwachs, Ricoeur refers to this as a 
    widening of the temporal horizon of younger generations, [18], p. 
    394).
4.2. Plot 2: Discovering that Collective Memories are 
    Constructed in the Public Square
If collective re-membering fashions our stories into a form of 
    archaeological artifact, we need to excavate the factors involved 
    in the propagation of a commonly shared repertoire that links the 
    contemporary generation of disciplinary academics to the past. 
    Here, Herodotus can help. When describing Babylonian customs, 
    Herodotus notes that the sick do not consult physicians but rather, 
    if someone is ill, they are laid in the public square and if the 
    passers-by have had a similar ailment or know someone themselves 
    who has had the disease, they: “give him advice, recommending him 
    to do whatever they found good in their own case, or in a case 
    known to them.” (Herodotus, Histories, 1:197). 
    We have a similar process when it comes to learning about how to 
    resolve issues in teaching. Studies make it quite clear that when 
    we have a problem-solving situation in our classrooms, we are 
    highly likely to prefer the example or advice of an associate to 
    abstract theory or empirical findings ([26], p. 116).
Like the Babylonians, when it comes to teaching, rather than 
    going for a robust evidence-base, Humanities academics enter the 
    disciplinary public square to see how colleagues made meaning out 
    of an apparently similar situation. In this we encounter a context 
    where how we remember the circumstances and what is important to 
    value is directly influenced by the “interruption” of our 
    colleagues. In turn, those colleagues may well be recalling what 
    they heard previously. This process is similar, then, to Halbwach’s 
    notion that collective memories are “recalled to us through others 
    even though only we were participants in the events” ([16], p. 23). 
    We have the original experience, but in discussion with others, 
    there is the potential for a collectively influenced reframing. How 
    we make sense of the circumstances becomes entwined with the 
    register of sense-making of our predecessors as well as our 
    contemporaries.
4.3. Plot 3: Finding the Public Square Turned into a 
    Disciplinary Gated-Community
The prologue noted how stories can function to invite in or 
    exclude those who encounter them, which raises the question of 
    whether our collective re-membering operates in such a way that the 
    public square conversations increasingly occur within a virtual 
    fence, one that includes and excludes. The work on significant 
    conversational networks about learning and teaching analyzed in 
    Roxä and Märtensson [27,28] demonstrates how the bulk of 
    conversational “passers-by” in the public square are drawn from our 
    immediate disciplinary circle. The resultant network is based on 
    trust, privacy, and shared intellectual problem-solving regarding 
    teaching. What this means is, we have a clique to whom and from 
    whom we construct our understanding of teaching. Our insularity can 
    turn the public square into a virtually gated community.
Given that collective culture will orchestrate forgetting as 
    well as re-membering, the skewing of our meaning-making towards a 
    dominant or authoritative narrative within it becomes more probable 
    [29,30]. This is not to deny the role of contestation and mediation 
    within the process, which Halbwachs failed to address ([30], p. 
    379) and is increasingly the focus of debate [19]. Instead, it is 
    to indicate the possibility of repetitions across generations that 
    would result in a shared repertoire (sometimes regardless of 
    changes to the material circumstances) because of the apparent 
    legitimacy and authority associated with collective memories.
Recognizing this is important because, if Boyer and Wertsch 
    ([31], p. 113) are right, the cultural “tools” represented in such 
    repetitions express a particular agenda or goal (an implicit plot 
    perhaps) without seeking recourse to explicit standards of veracity 
    (as is witnessed when our discourse slips into nostalgia, for 
    example). Indeed, if we examine what our qualitative data-sets 
    suggest about our agendas related to the links between research, 
    teaching and graduate attributes, what is exhibited maps onto 
    evidence of how collective re-memories function, including:
(1) Toleration of distortion (such as inconsistencies between 
    espoused over-all beliefs about learning and teaching and the 
    narrative resources used to illustrate what we mean);
(2) Smoothing over of paradoxes;
(3) Inattention to omissions. In re-narration, for example, 
    problematic and ambiguous content is often omitted ([32], p. 15). 
    For Halbwachs this is one of the ways we deal with “inconvenient 
    memories” ([17], p. 50);
(4) Assimilation of our senior colleagues’ memories. This may 
    “widen our temporal horizon”, giving us access to practical wisdom 
    evolved over time, but it might also imprison the conversations in 
    a passive persistence of first impressions ([18], pp. 394, 427), 
    circumscribing criticality and consequential expertise 
    acquisition;
(5) Amalgamation of phantoms which allow our immediate past to 
    be linked to decontextualised beliefs about disciplinary 
    predecessors we have not known. These phantoms often help locate 
    our identity in a more positive history of the discipline. This 
    process, in turn, can lapse into nostalgia and stereotyping, 
    suppressing negative aspects of the longer past in the service of 
    the kind of people we are or assume ourselves to be (see: [21]). 
    These phantoms, in effect, enable us to engage historical 
    representations to provoke and solidify particular 
    identity-oriented affect and meaning (see: [33], p. 16). In this 
    such phantoms lead to:
(6) Provision of forms of moral regulation.
In the process of translating practical wisdom from one 
    situation to another, the plot may be subtly driven by established 
    frameworks so that sight of the need to be creative is lost. 
    Moreover, the translations cultivate a portfolio of narratives that 
    exclude those who fail to accept the incorporated distortions, 
    impressions, phantoms, and moral regulation.
