What is sectarianism ? 
The words sectarian and sectarianism can be understood in a number of ways . They can refer to the distinction between different groups ( sects ) ( not necessarily religious : they can exist in politics , art , literature and science ) ( O'Toole , 1975 ) . Each group ( sect ) is exclusive , has a distinct shared ideology , and tends to construct barriers between themselves and other groups ( Wallis , 1975 ) . The second understanding is used in a pejorative sense and refers to a more extreme form of the exclusivity of the group – distinctions harden into divisions and divisiveness , which engenders hostility between sects . In Scotland , Sectarianism refers primarily , though not exclusively , to inter-denominational hostility between Christians : Roman Catholics and Protestants and is normally used in a pejorative sense . 3 The report on Religiously Aggravated Offending in Scotland 2012–2013 provides evidence of an increase in the percentage of charges that referred to Islam ( up to 11.6 % ) and Judaism ( up to 3.9 % ) ( Scottish Government , 2013 ) . ' Roman Catholic ' and ' Protestant ' must be understood in the broadest sociological sense to incorporate a wide variety of interpretations of Catholic and Protestant identity , ranging from those with authority and responsibility within the denomination to the religiously observant to those with some adherence to those with the most tenuous of links . 
A number of definitions and descriptions of sectarianism have been constructed that can be applied to the contemporary Scottish context ( Finn , 1999 , 2003 ; Leichty & Clegg , 2001 ; Bruce et al. , 2004 ; Scottish Government , 2012 ) . Drawing from these sources , I have developed my own working definition as follows . Sectarianism consists of intolerant beliefs and attitudes that may be translated into actions . These can be expressed in inter-personal , communal and possibly institutional ways . Sectarianism involves some exclusivist and intransigent understanding of religious beliefs and attitudes , and is typically a shared or group identity that fosters a sense of belonging . This religious identity , however , can sometimes be more of a quasi or nominal religious identity , with very loose connections to one of the main religions . 4 Normally viewed as the following six world faiths : Buddhism ; Christianity ; Hinduism ; Islam ; Judaism  and Sikhism  ( Cole , 1998 ) . Sectarian groups tend to claim that their identity is founded on authentic historical roots and shared memory , roots and memory that may , however , be selective , self-serving or semi-mythical . The group is configured such that other groups that hold contrasting beliefs and attitudes can be perceived to threaten the identity and history of the group and are stigmatized as the ' others ' . In a sense it is a claim for belonging and communal identity that is partly defined by affirming an authentic identity but also partly defined by opposition to the threat of the inauthentic – the others . Sectarianism , thus , justifies the marginalization , alienation and possible demonization of the ' others ' . This can lead to hostility , verbal abuse , intimidation , and even violence . 
The definition above expresses the view that sectarianism is a social problem that is closely related to religious ( or quasi religious ) beliefs , practices and identity and can lead to extreme attitudes and behaviour . The next section will explore the idea of sectarianism as a social problem that is closely related to religion . 
Sectarianism as a Social Problem 
On the Scottish Government website , there is statement about sectarianism and legislation on sectarianism , beginning with the following sentence : 
Sectarianism , and the anti-social , bigoted and violent behaviour it creates , has plagued the lives of too many people for too long . 
The statement continues with a quote from the First Minister Alex Salmond : 
... the song tells us for Scotland to flourish then ' let us be rid of those bigots and fools who will not let Scotland , live and let live . ' Our new Scotland is built on the old custom of hospitality . We offer a hand that is open to all , whether they hail from England , Ireland , Pakistan or Poland . Modern Scotland is also built on equality . We will not tolerate sectarianism as a parasite in our national game of football or anywhere else in this society . ( Scottish Government , 2011 ) 
The First minister has discussed sectarianism in other public statements that are equally strongly worded . He has described sectarianism as a ' blight ' that needs to be driven out and ' excised ' ( Carrell , 2011 ) , a ' problem ' that is going to be eradicated ( BBC News , 2011a ) , and a ' legacy ' that the government is determined to ' wipe out ' ( Education Scotland , 2013a ) . He has stated that this is an issue with ' huge ramifications across society ' and it is to be ' eliminated ' from Scottish football and Scottish society ( BCC news , 2011b ) . A spokesperson for the First Minister has stated that the Scottish parliament is determined to ' stamp out ' this ' sort of behaviour once and for all ' ( STV news , 2011 ) . 
These public statements frame sectarianism as a serious social problem that needs to be addressed . Different terminology can be used to distinguish the seriousness of a social problem : social evil and social problem . The term social evil suggests a long-term social problem that is severe and appears to be unresolvable , for example , poverty can be considered to be a social evil ( Harris , 2009 ) . The more commonly used term , social problem , is less extreme and can refer to social problems of varying degrees of severity , including serious social problems , while retaining a degree of optimism that some or all serious social problems can be resolved ( Unwin , 2009 ) . The wording in the statements quoted above refers to sectarianism as a severe social problem , but not a social evil , as there is optimism that it can be resolved . Let us explore the implications of the identification of sectarianism as a social problem , drawing from sociological theory and analysis , and then expand the discussion by exploring sectarianism as a social problem that is related to religion . 
A social problem is described as a problem that is threatening , distressing , bad or undesirable such that some action is required to remedy the problem ( Rubington & Weinberg , 2003 ; Alessio , 2011 , p. 2 ) . Social problems may be short-term or long-term . A social problem may , arguably , refer to one person or a few people but is more often characterized as a problem that affects a significant number of people ( Alessio , 2011 ) . It can be unclear , however , what constitutes a ' significant number ' of people . Rubington and Weinberg ( 2003 ) point out that , in some situations , it may be that the situation affects a smaller number of significant people ( e.g. in terms of political or economic influence ) rather than a significant number of people . There are also claims that some social problems are universal – they can affect everybody , including the more socially advantaged ( examples would include wide spread alcohol and drug abuse ) . These claims may mask the detrimental impact that the social problem has on particular groups of people who have limited financial resource or support networks to counter the effects of the social problem ( Wagner , 2003 ) . 
Social problems are often complex and may have a number of causes and effects , and may require a number of remedies ( Alessio , 2011 ) . One of the challenges in studying social problems is that there can be over-emphasis on the effects of social problems rather than on the causes ( though the two can be interchangeable ) . Fuller and Myers ( 2003 , pp. 95–96 ) argue that social problems have a ' natural history ' and propose that there are three phases of the natural history : awareness ; policy determination and reform . These three phases are not mutually exclusive and can overlap . Awareness of the problem is raised when those affected or alarmed by the social problem draw attention to the problem . Policy determination refers to the discussion about action that should be taken . Fuller and Myers state that groups that are ' more official tend to focus on the ends rather than the means . The final phase is Reform when legislation ( where appropriate ) may be formalized and public action and reforms are enacted by interest groups such as charities and church groups . 
If we return to the public statements that are quoted , or partially quoted , at the beginning of this section , we can see that sectarianism coheres with many of the features of social problems as outlined above . It is bad and undesirable – it is a ' problem ' , ' anti-social ' , a ' blight ' . It is a ' parasite ' on football . It is threatening – it creates ' bigoted and violent behavior ' . It has affected a significant number of people , ' too many people ' . It has prevailed over a long term , ' for too long ' with ' huge ramifications across society ' . It is antithetical to the aims of the Scottish Government and the vision of ' our new Scotland ' ( ' hospitality ' ; ' equality ' ; welcome to all – ' a hand that is open to all ' ) . Action is required – ' let us be rid of those bigots ' , it is not to be ' tolerated ' , it is to be ' wiped out ' , ' eradicated ' , ' stamped out ' . Sectarianism , however , is a particular type of social problem that involves religion and it is instructive , at this point , to examine the relation between social problems and religion . 
Social problems and religion 
Hjelm ( 2011 ) states that religion has historically been associated with social problems , as part of the solution and / or as part of the cause or source of the social problem . We can identify several ways of viewing the relation between religion and social problems . 
( 1 ) Religion as a solution to social problems . Christian churches were instrumental in care for the marginalized , poor and sick in western society before the introduction of welfare states in western societies ( Hjelm , 2011 ) . This has continued in the modern world and most of the mainstream religions engage in local and international social welfare initiatives ( Christian Aid , 2013 ; Jewish Relief Agency , 2013 ; Muslim Aid , 2013 ) . Beckford ( 2011 ) argues that religion can also be used as a ' device ' or a ' resource ' by governments as part of the solution for social problems . The New Labour British governments , for example , have publicly validated religious and ethnic diversity and even appropriated religion and religious groups to help combat social problems ( making sure they contribute to social cohesion ) . Beckford cites another example of politicians in America who have appropriated the language of religious leaders for political purposes . Religious leaders used the language of compassion to attack the labeling of Latin American immigrants as illegal aliens and as a social problem . This language of compassion was adopted by politicians who sought the support of the immigrant community . 
( 2 ) Religion as a social problem . Academics point to 9/11 as a contemporary catalyst for the view that all forms of religion can be perceived as potential social problems and that religions can view other religions as social problems ( Hjelm , 2011 ) . This can lead to an association between religion , extremism and terrorism ( Mowlam & Creggan , 2009 ) . There are other ways in which religion can be perceived to be a social problem . Religion can be viewed as divisive in society because it appears to justify discrimination and sometimes persecution of specific groups : women , gays , people of other denominations or religion , or people who have no faith ( Watts & Utting , 2009 ) . Religion is considered to be anti-rational and based on fundamental principles and beliefs that can not be supported by scientific evidence and religion can , therefore , be perceived to be an impediment to human and scientific progress ( Dawkins , 2006 ) . Religions have the opportunity to continue their influence through faith schools ( many are partially or fully funded by the state ) ( British Humanist Association , 2013 ) . Faith schools have been accused of being divisive , selective , exclusive , introverted and of inculcating and indoctrinating children with unverified principles and beliefs ( Halstead & McLaughlin , 2005 ; Mason , 2005 ; Marples , 2006 ) . These faith schools are perceived to contribute to religion as a social problem and are in themselves social problems . 
Sectarianism in Scotland appears to cohere with a number of senses of religion as a social problem . Sectarianism , inter-denominational religious strife , is viewed by some to be based on anti-rational religious principles and beliefs . Sectarianism is divisive because sectarian attitudes can , and have , justified discrimination , persecution and even violence . There also appear to be issues about the possible divisiveness of state funded Catholic schools in Scotland as contributing to sectarianism . We now begin to have a fuller understanding of sectarianism as a social problem that is related to religion . Sectarianism needs to be understood , like all social problems , then , as complex and as having a number of causes and effects . Finn ( 1999 ) argues that the causes and effects require careful analysis . Extending this point , caution must be exercised : single causes ( anti-Catholicism , anti-Protestantism , anti-Irishness and anti-immigrant ) may be prominent at different periods of time but should not be understood to be the root cause otherwise the conceptualization of sectarianism may be reduced to one strand of a complex social problem . Significant emphasis placed on anti-Catholicism or anti-Protestantism reduces sectarianism to one-sided religious bigotry . Focussing on Anti-Irishness or anti-immigration similarly reduces sectarianism to single strands : a form of racism and zenophobia . 5 There is some debate about whether anti-Irishness can be correctly identified as racism , as Scots and Irish are not races ( Finn , 2000 ) . Finn argues persuasively that the Irish menace campaign racialized the debate and the Irish Catholics . 
