The Conundrum of Marginality: Mercurius Politicus, Order 
    and the Politics of Glencairn’s Rising
Recently there has been an increased interest in print culture 
    and how the Cromwellian regime used propaganda to justify its own 
    position, actions and existence in the face of immense hostility 
    after the execution of Charles I. These studies have led to a 
    better understanding of how the English Republic understood itself. 
    Historians now have a clearer picture of the English Republic, its 
    image and how it promoted its values through the printing presses 
    in London and Edinburgh and how it distanced itself from the Stuart 
    monarchy. The republic created its own political culture by forming 
    new civic institutions, ceremonial events, imagery, and the 
    political organisation of government.1 Sean Kelsey, 
    Inventing a Republic: The Political Culture of the 
    Commonwealth (Manchester, 1997), 85 – 113; Sarah Barber, 
    Regicide and Republicanism: Politics and Ethics in the 
    English Revolution 1646 – 1659 (Edinburgh, 1998), 147 – 
    173; Kevin Sharpe, Image Wars: Promoting Kings and 
    Commonwealths in England 1603 – 1660 (New Haven, 2010), 
    see part iv ‘Representing a Republic’. In particular, 
    there has been an interest in how the regime used propaganda to 
    justify the conquest of Scotland: either as an evangelical 
    promotion of liberty of conscience to liberate the country from the 
    Presbyterian kirk or as a form of republican imperial expansion 
    inspired by classical writers. 2 Scott Spurlock, 
    Cromwell and Scotland: Conquest and Religion 
    1650 – 1660 (Edinburgh, 2007), 1 – 99; Jim Smyth, ‘Empire Building: 
    The English Republic, Scotland and Ireland’ in Ariel Hessayon and 
    David Finnegan (eds), Varieties of Seventeenth- and 
    Eighteenth-Century English Radicalism in Context 
    (Aldershot, 2011), 129 – 144. Indeed, many of these 
    analyses are overtly dominated by the dissemination and control of 
    propaganda surrounding the immediate conquest of Scotland by Oliver 
    Cromwell in 1650 or the Protester and Resolutioner controversy 
    within the Scottish kirk. 3 Scott Spurlock ‘Cromwell’s 
    Edinburgh Press and the Development of Print Culture in Scotland’, 
    Scottish Historical Review, 90 (2011), 179 – 
    203; Nicole Greenspan, Selling Cromwell’s Wars: Media, 
    Empire and Godly Warfare (London, 2012), 39 – 67; Kyle D. 
    Holfelder, ‘Factionalism in the Kirk during the Cromwellian 
    Invasion and Occupation of Scotland 1650 – 1660: The Protester and 
    Resolutioner Controversy’ (PhD Thesis, University of Edinburgh, 
    1999) There have also been significant developments 
    explaining how news books and pamphlets were written and controlled 
    by the government during the 1650s. Jason Peacey has uncovered the 
    growing complex and comprehensive system of press regulation and 
    censorship which originated in the early 1640s under the Long 
    Parliament, reaching its peak under the ever watchful eye of John 
    Thurloe, Cromwell’s Secretary of State for most of the 1650s. 
    4 Jason Peacey, ‘Cromwellian England: A Propaganda 
    State’, History, 91 (April, 2006), 176 – 
    199.
During the 1650s intelligence gathering and the responsibility 
    for the suppression of disreputable pamphlets had shifted from the 
    local courts to the office of Thomas Scot, Thurloe’s predecessor as 
    head of intelligence. Plans were made for a reform of press control 
    in 1653 and it was Thurloe who was appointed to oversee the 
    reforms. After the establishment of the Protectorate, press control 
    was enacted with more aggression. Indeed, many of the ordinances 
    passed to control press regulation by parliaments and the Protector 
    began to restrict the success of new titles, leading to the 
    ‘effective monopoly’ of Mercurius Politicus, 
    ‘the most important single newspaper of the 1650s’.5 
    Ibid., 179 – 180, 185 – 186. Why were the governments of 
    the 1650s increasingly keen to tighten their grip upon the news 
    books?
Barry Coward has stated that the English regime had a collective 
    feeling of victimisation and defensiveness due to the hostility 
    towards its existence from all sides, both at home and abroad, in 
    effect a ‘siege mentality’.6 Barry Coward, The 
    Cromwellian Protectorate (Manchester, 2002), 52 – 
    58. English policies were therefore equally driven by 
    the insecurities and fears of the English regime, not just the 
    fortunes of providence and godly zeal.7 Frances Dow, 
    Cromwellian Scotland (Edinburgh, 1979), 14 – 
    34. Some of the reasons for this insecurity lay in the 
    conquest of Scotland, a nation subjected to military occupation for 
    the whole decade and, despite Scotland’s own internal divisions, 
    the English regime became extremely unpopular amongst significant 
    sections of Scotland’s elite. This was something the English 
    government was painfully aware of and in 1655 it established a 
    council to give government a more civilian character and presence 
    in the wake of Glencairn’s Rising – a Royalist rebellion which took 
    place in the Highlands between January 1653 and September 
    1655.8 Ibid., 162 – 168.
Arguably, Scotland was caught between two ‘orders’ during 
    Glencairn’s rising, on one hand an English military occupation 
    seemingly determined to strip Scotland of her identity through 
    incorporation, riding high on its own providential destiny and 
    benevolence and, on the other, 
    side, a committed but divided and at times fearsome force of 
    marauding Highlanders determined to restore the Stuarts to the 
    throne.9 David Stevenson ‘Cromwell, Scotland and Ireland’ 
    in John Morrill (ed.), Oliver Cromwell and the English 
    Revolution (London, 1990), 165. Indeed, the 
    rising was a serious challenge to the regime in Scotland, directly 
    challenging the legitimacy of English rule, not just by guerrilla 
    warfare in the Highlands but effectively setting up rival chains of 
    military command, tax collection and organisation, in direct 
    competition with the English military apparatus in Scotland. 
    Throughout the rebellion the Scottish people were torn between the 
    two sources of authority, a government based in London and Dalkeith 
    with a distinctly ‘English’ hue and ‘unnatural’ policies and the 
    Highlanders whose authority was rooted in the old order but with 
    the main protagonist, Charles II, being exiled in 
    France.10 Dow, Cromwellian Scotland, 
    74 – 160; Coward, The Cromwellian Protectorate, 
    139 – 158.
The source of the English regime’s discomfort and insecurity is 
    brought into sharper focus if we consider the wider ramifications 
    of the rising across all three kingdoms. Indeed, the English 
    government had to face a fractured but fully operational alliance 
    of foes across all three kingdoms from 1649. The regime’s foes may 
    have been defeated but they had not completely disappeared. During 
    the rising, the English government, gathering intelligence, were 
    fearful of an outbreak of violence and rebellion in the north of 
    Ireland. The Protestant Royalist gentry and the Ulster-Scots were 
    put under surveillance. Glencairn’s rising contributed to the plans 
    for the transplantation of the Ulster-Scots, the English government 
    hoping that with their removal to the south of Ireland it would 
    create a ‘break’ in Royalist communications with Scotland. In 
    addition, the government was eager, after the establishment of the 
    Protectorate, to include English Presbyterians as valued members of 
    the church system in England, perhaps to offset another three 
    kingdoms 
    accommodation.11
David Menarry, ‘Rebellion, Transplantation and 
    Composition: The Ulster Scots Landed Elite and the Commonwealth’ in 
    William P. Kelly and John R. Young (eds), Scotland and the 
    Ulster Plantations: Explorations in the British Settlement of 
    Stuart Ireland (Dublin, 2009), 137 – 159; Ann Hughes ‘The 
    Public Profession of these Nations: The National Church in 
    Interregnum England’ in Christopher Durston and Judith Maltby 
    (eds), Religion in Revolutionary England 
    (Manchester, 2006), 100 – 101.
It is no surprise then that the 1650s saw an increased 
    tightening of press censorship and regulation, with a regime 
    determined to ‘inform’ and shape the opinions of its citizens about 
    life at home and abroad on a weekly basis with newspapers such as 
    the dominant Mercurius Politicus whose job it 
    was to admittedly ‘quell, rather than foster public 
    debate’.12 Jason Peacey ‘Print and Public Politics in 
    Seventeenth Century England’, History Compass 5 
    (2007), 99. As Jason Peacey has commented: ‘The 
    production of newspapers involved a range of tactical decisions and 
    political acts, from the selection of stories for publication to 
    the overall editorial direction, and such decisions were 
    susceptible to influence by sources outside the editorial 
    office.’13 Jason Peacey, ‘The Management of Civil War 
    Newspapers: Auteurs, Entrepreneurs and Editorial Control’, 
    Seventeenth Century, 21 (2006), 106. 
    Mercurius Politicus was very much subject to 
    ‘outside’ influence where ‘producing newspapers was integrated with 
    intelligence gathering’.14 Ibid., 108. Indeed, 
    both Thomas Scot and John Thurloe freely admitted that the 
    intelligencers filled the papers with news. However, as Jason 
    Peacey acknowledges, it is difficult to know at which point the 
    editing took place – either before the intelligencers handed over 
    the material or when it was dealt with by the editor himself, 
    Marchamont Nedham. It is clear, however, that the independence of 
    Nedham’s opinions is questionable considering he had financial 
    security from the government due to his role as newspaper editor. 
    The government could remove official editors at a whim. Testimony 
    to this is Nedham’s removal when the Rump was restored in 1659 
    because of his association with the Protectorate.15 
    Ibid., 108, 109, 115 – 116. For our purposes we know 
    that intelligence gathering and the news regarding Scotland in 
    Mercurius Politicus were very closely linked, Thurloe worked 
    closely with agents in Scotland, including George Monck and Henry 
    Whalley, to obtain information and as Peacey comments Thurloe was 
    Marchamont Nedham’s ‘best and most reliable informant’.16 
    Peacey ‘A Propaganda State, 181, 196.
To what extent and in which method was the intelligence coming 
    out of Scotland regarding the rising manipulated and used by the 
    government and editor alike? What does this tell us about the 
    English regime itself? Anthropologist Victor Turner commented that 
    in prolonged periods of liminality, that is to say ‘in between 
    situations and conditions which are characterised by the 
    dislocation of established structures, the reversal of hierarchies 
    and uncertainty regarding future and traditional outcomes’, that 
    self proclaimed ‘ceremony masters’ emerge and assume leadership 
    positions in an attempt to ‘Perpetuate liminality and by emptying 
    the liminal moment of real creativity, turn it into a scene of 
    mimetic rivalry’.17 A. Hovarth, B. Thomassen and H. Wydra 
    ‘Introduction: Liminality and the Cultures of Change’, 
    International Political Anthropology, 2 (2009), 
    16; A. Hovarth and B. Thomassen, ‘Mimetic Errors in Liminal 
    Schismogenisis: On the Political Anthropology of the Trickster’, 
    International Political Anthropology, 1 (2008), 
    13; A. Szakolczai, ‘Liminality and Experience: Structuring 
    Transitory Situations and Transformative Events’ 
    International Political Anthropology, 2 (2009) 
    155. These people have been labelled as ‘tricksters’ by 
    anthropologists. A trickster is ‘an obscure … shadowy figure’. 
    These are always ‘marginal characters: outsiders they cannot trust 
    or be trusted … they are repulsive’.18 Szakolczai, 
    ‘Liminality and Experience’, 155. In a liminal state the 
    trickster is very dangerous because ‘a trickster can capture the 
    occasion and institute a lasting reversal of roles and values … 
    Where certainties are lost, the imative behaviour escalates, and 
    tricksters can often be mistaken for charismatic 
    leaders’.19 Ibid., 155. Highlanders for 
    centuries had been considered as marginal figures living on the 
    edge of civilisation. Indeed, some of the most critical comments 
    came from their fellow Scots and were found in the English press 
    during the 1650s.20 Michael Newton, Warriors of 
    the Word: The World of the Scottish Highlanders 
    (Edinburgh, 2009), 59 – 67; Allan I. Macinnes, Clanship, 
    Commerce and the House of Stuart, 1603 – 1788 (Edinburgh, 
    1996), 56 – 87. Was the charismatic leader Glencairn 
    ‘tricking’ the Scots into the old ways again? Glencairn’s men 
    provide an interesting case study in this particular 
    anthropological context. What is even more interesting is the 
    position of the English regime itself, arguably a regime on the 
    ‘margins’ of Europe due to its political situation. This paper will 
    explore statements made about the Highlanders in Mercurius 
    Politicus and will analyse the use (and abuse) of intelligence 
    received and ask how this reflects upon the position of the regime 
    and in doing so it will unravel a conundrum of marginality and ask 
    who indeed was the ‘trickster’ – the Highlanders or the English 
    Republic itself?
Sources of Intelligence: Letters from Scotland to the 
    Printing Press
Before we examine the image of the Highlander in Mercurius 
    Politicus we first have to determine and introduce the cast of 
    characters and sources involved in the collation of intelligence, 
    their strengths and weaknesses and by doing so will reveal the 
    complicated nature of the processes involved in turning 
    intelligence into printed news. It is important to remember that 
    each ‘author’ or ‘editor’ in this process had their own agendas and 
    their own natural ‘selective’ idea of what may have been important 
    information to report. In effect it is likely that at each stage of 
    the process the facts were likely to be embellished or distorted; 
    either naturally or deliberately. As Jason Peacey has argued it is 
    very difficult for historians to get the ‘truth’ from the 
    newspapers.
