Introduction
Approaching the Q document using the abstract and etic term 
    ‘spirituality’ may evoke concerns of anachronism. It is indeed true 
    that the term ‘spirituality’ or semantically equivalent Greek terms 
    are not to be found in the reconstructed Q document. In fact, 
    perhaps the closest related conceptual term in the New Testament is 
    πνευματικός, which does not denote 
    the abstract idea of ‘spirituality’, but is an adjectival 
    descriptor that portrays people or objects as being ‘spiritual’. It 
    is primarily a Pauline term, occurring 25 times in the Pauline 
    corpus,1 and twice in 1 Peter and once 
    in Revelation.2 Notwithstanding the fact 
    that the closest related term does not occur in gospel literature, 
    applying the modern idea of spirituality to an ancient text such as 
    Q can cast into sharper relief some aspects of that text which 
    might otherwise be overlooked. Admittedly, caution is required to 
    ensure that the text is not pressed into modern categories that are 
    foreign to it.
In the discourse surrounding the study of religion, 
    ‘spirituality’ has become a common way of referring to the 
    experience of the divine either within a religious movement, or to 
    denote the sense of the transcendent outside of formal religious 
    settings. Whilst this may encapsulate part of the broad sense of 
    the term, an agreed or accurate definition is notoriously 
    difficult. One of the attractions of new religious movements is 
    that they promise fresh experiences of the divine, and are often 
    seen by adherents as repristinating institutional religions, 
    especially when the sense of direct contact with the transcendent 
    has been domesticated by formal mediation. Such newfound religious 
    commitment can rekindle the sense of spiritual vitality and the 
    experience of the immediacy of the transcendent. As part of the 
    earliest literary strata of the nascent Jesus movement, the Q 
    document is a textual product of such a new religious movement. It 
    is therefore interesting to explore the document's strategy in 
    addressing its readers to comprehend the manner in which it offers 
    authentic contact with the divine, perhaps with the concomitant 
    critique of existing religious institutions. Therefore, in this 
    discussion a broad definition of spirituality will be adopted in 
    line with the approach of most sociologists of religion. Hence, the 
    spirituality of the Q document will be determined through its 
    insights into experiencing contact with the transcendent or divine, 
    and by probing the claim of more immediate religious experience.
It is necessary to return to the definitional issue to gain more 
    traction on what is being investigated. As has been noted, the 
    definition of ‘spirituality’ is notoriously contested and has been 
    understood differently within various religious or non-religious 
    settings. A general definition is open-ended, with the following 
    being representative of the broad contours of what is typically 
    understood by the term spirituality:
[…] a transcendent dimension within human experience. 
    This dimension is discovered in moments in which the individual 
    questions the meaning of personal existence and attempts to place 
    the self within a broader ontological context. (Shfranske & 
    Gorsuch 1984:231)
Within the broad framework of Christian understanding, it is 
    widely held ‘that the study of spirituality appropriately involves 
    a focus on “experience.” Although there is no final consensus on 
    what “experience” means or how it can best be studied’ (Holder 
    2007:2). However, most modern approaches to Christian spirituality 
    have noted that the object of study is not simply a series of 
    discrete or ecstatic events, but an ongoing existential phenomenon. 
    Consequently, recent definitions have tended to emphasise the 
    continuous nature of the experience under examination. Thus, 
    Schneiders suggests that:
Spirituality is the actualization of the basic human 
    capacity for transcendence […] the experience of conscious 
    involvement in the project of life-integration through 
    self-transcendence towards the horizon of ultimate value one 
    perceives. (Schneiders 2007:16)
In the discussion that follows, spirituality and the concept of 
    religious experience will be understood broadly. Thus, the purpose 
    of the discussion is to understand the perceived experiential 
    benefits that enabled those believers in Jesus familiar with the 
    teaching enshrined in Q to maintain their religious commitment in 
    the face of real or perceived ostracism, alienation, and 
    persecution from wider society.
Q texts that illuminate the theme of spirituality
The theme of spirituality or religious experience is nowhere 
    discussed in Q. Instead it is necessary to examine the material 
    contained in the text to uncover what it was that enabled Q 
    disciples to maintain their commitment to this new and liminal 
    religious movement. That commitment stood in the face of 
    persecution and ostracism (Q 6.22–6.23), whether perceived or real. 
    Given that opposition, there must have been strong benefits, which 
    Q disciples perceived to outweigh the hostility and alienation that 
    was directed at them from members of the larger Jewish religious 
    movement that did not accept the message of Jesus (Cromhout 
    2007:304–306).3 By probing individual 
    texts, it is hoped to identify positive aspects of the religious 
    commitment to the teachings of Jesus. After these benefits have 
    been identified, the discussion will seek to identify any common 
    themes that might stand at the core of the spirituality or 
    religious experiences that the Q document offers to those who 
    adhere to its teachings.
The promise of the spirit in John’s preaching (Q 
    3.16b)
Within the reconstructed text of the Q 
    document4 the first promise of 
    encountering the divine occurs in the preaching of John the 
    Baptist. The Baptist pronounces the arrival of the ‘coming 
    one’, and announces that this figure ‘will baptize you in 
    the holy spirit and fire’ (Q 3.16b). The images of baptism and fire 
    speak of purification, especially to an audience familiar with 
    Jewish practices of lustrations for ritual purity, and burnt 
    offerings to atone for sins. As Valantasis (2005:48) observes, 
    ‘[t]he person and the community must be made sacred by 
    purification […] the wind/fire/spirit baptism indicates an 
    incremental but complete transformation’. However, the 
    purificatory rite is no longer institutionally administered, but is 
    achieved through direct contact with the Holy Spirit. Within the 
    Hebrew Bible, the spirit comes upon, or is poured out on those 
    uniquely designated to speak or act for the Lord (i.e. Jdg 13.25; 
    Is 11.2; Ezk 11.5). Here a democratisation of the experience of 
    direct contact with the divine is promised for those who undergo 
    the baptism of the coming one (Foster 
    2008:81–91).5 At this stage in the 
    timeframe of Q, this promise of encounter with the divine lies in 
    the eschatological future, with the coming one bringing the Holy 
    Spirit, which is the agent of God's eschatological 
    salvation.
The Q beatitudes (Q 6.20–6.23)
Possession of the kingdom of God is promised to the poor. This 
    existential reversal envisages the dispossessed of this world 
    becoming central figures in the kingly reign of God. Although some 
    have understood the statement ‘the kingdom of God is 
    yours’ to be a proleptic present (Davies & Allison 
    1998:445–447), it is better understood as reflecting the realised 
    eschatology of Q (Fleddermann 2005:324). God's kingdom is 
    mentioned 13 times elsewhere in Q (Q 7.28; 10.9; 11.2b, 20, 52; 
    12.31; 13.18, 20, 29; 16.16; 17.20, 21 [twice]). There is a tension 
    between future and realised aspects of the kingdom. In the 
    Lord's Prayer that calls for the kingdom of God to come has a 
    clear future orientation, but even here, it is a future that 
    that can be inaugurated through 
    the prayers of the faithful. By contrast, the present perspective 
    on the presence of the kingdom is seen through Jesus’ work as an 
    exorcist: ‘but if it is by the finger of God that I cast out 
    demons, then the kingdom of God has come upon you’ (Q 
    11.20). In both that context and here in Q 6.20 God's reign is 
    something that breaks into the present reality of followers of 
    Jesus, because he heralds in the eschatological power of God.
It is often noted that in the reconstructed sequence of Q, the 
    first beatitude follows the final temptation (Q 4.5–4.8) where the 
    devil offers Jesus all the kingdoms of the world. In contrast to 
    this temptation to possess earthly dominion and authority, Jesus 
    promises the poor that their liminal status already means that they 
    have a place in the heavenly kingdom. Thus, there is an inversion 
    between material experience and spiritual status, thus privileging 
    the socially marginal.
Love of enemies (Q 6.27–6.28, 35c–35d)
Alongside poverty, suffering is promised as being the route that 
    leads to a familial relationship with God. Q believers are exhorted 
    to ‘pray for those who persecute you, that you may become 
    sons of your father’ (Q 6.28, 6.35c). The experience of the 
    divine is expressed in terms of relationship. This suggests a 
    permanence of the spiritual dimension that is promised in the Q 
    document, which is not a transitory or ephemeral encounter with the 
    deity. Love of enemies (Q 6.27) and praying for persecutors (6.28) 
    are actions that are best understood as emulating the behaviour of 
    God (Nolland 1989:300).6 Hence, 
    followers of Jesus demonstrate their filial relationship with God 
    by replicating the same behaviour as the deity. Through acting like 
    God, they are drawn into relationship with him as his children. It 
    is in this manner, as God's children, that Q believers are 
    seen as having an intimate experience of the transcendent.
God’s revelation to children (Q 10.21–10.24)
Jesus’ thanksgiving to the ‘Father, Lord of heaven and 
    earth’ in Q 10.21 centres upon the belief that God has kept 
    hidden certain things from those who are viewed as being wise, and 
    instead he has disclosed these hidden things to those described as 
    ‘children’ (Q 10.21). Contact with the divine is not purely a 
    sensory experience of followers of Jesus; it is also a pedagogical 
    phenomenon whereby such disciples receive revelation that is 
    withheld from those who are not privileged as recipients of 
    divinely disclosed information.
This Q speech continues by explaining that in order to become a 
    recipient of divine revelation, one must have the father made known 
    through the son. In a sequential series of revelatory acts, it is 
    declared that the father alone knows the son, and in a reciprocal 
    manner, the son alone knows the father. What might be an 
    impenetrable circle of knowledge of the divine is broken open, 
    since in the final clause this knowledge of the father is not 
    limited exclusively to the son (Nolland 
    1993:575).7 Rather it is extended 
    ‘to whomever the son chooses to reveal him’ (Q 
    10.22). Thus as Fleddermann (2005:448) observes, ‘[t]he first 
    speech emphasizes the Father's desire to communicate his 
    revelation to small children (v. 21d) and the Son's desire to 
    reveal the Father (v. 22d.)’. Therefore, this statement in Q 
    reflects the divine desire for revelation to humanity, as well as 
    explaining the chosen method – disclosure through the son who has 
    privileged knowledge of the father.
The experience of the transcendent is further portrayed in this 
    section through the statement made in the following makarism: 
    ‘blessed are the eyes that see what you see’ (Q 
    10.23). Here the eyes of believers are blessed because they have 
    seen the revelation of God described in the previous two verses. 
    The act of seeing has a double function in this context. It refers 
    both to the viewing of Jesus’ signs and miracles, but at a deeper 
    level it describes the spiritual perception of Q believers who have 
    the insight to apprehend the significance of such signs. Hence, the 
    miracles of Jesus, according to Q, constitute the locus for 
    revelation if they are understood as revealing Jesus as the son who 
    can make the father known, and at the same time, they function to 
    draw those with such perception into a filial relationship with 
    God. Therefore, Q's spirituality is centred upon discerning 
    the status of Jesus, and acknowledging him to be the medium through 
    whom the father is known.
Answer to prayer (Q 11.9–11.13)
Prayer is a significant theme in Q. Having given the example of 
    the Lord's Prayer, Q immediately follows this model prayer 
    with a basic theology of the role of intercession in the life of 
    believers. In describing divine response to petitionary prayer, the 
    Q saying makes a comparative argument. The reasoning is that if 
    earthly fathers know how to give good gifts to their children, then 
    ‘how much more will the father from heaven give good things 
    to those who ask him’ (Q 11.9). This is a type of the 
    Jewish qal wahomer argument that reasons from the lesser case to 
    the greater by using the precedent established from the generally 
    accepted lesser example. Therefore, access to God and trust in the 
    responsive provision of his fatherly generosity are key to Q's 
    understanding of the spiritual blessings that its religionists will 
    receive.
Once again, the perspective of Q is that those who enjoy a 
    special familial type relationship with God as children of the 
    heavenly father receive the privilege of divine response to prayer 
    (Davies & Allison 1998:684). These verses also reflect the 
    centrality of prayer in the spiritual life promoted by Q. No doubt, 
    the role of prayer in religious life was not an innovation on the 
    part of the author of Q or even of Jesus as he is characterised in 
    that document. Instead, it was part of wider Jewish spirituality. 
    Nevertheless, the intimacy of prayer language is characteristic of 
    the early Jesus movement, with God portrayed as the archetypal 
    paternal figure who delights in providing for his offspring 
    (Fleddermann 2005:473, n. 252).
