Culture and Occurrence of Transvestism
Despite the practical need to restrict cross-dressing in order 
    to manage the established social structure, transvestism was widely 
    discussed in popular culture. As an example, plays and poems 
    featuring female to male crossdressers, both casual and committed, 
    were very popular at the beginning of the seventeenth century and 
    served as a medium for discussion of the topic. Even in wider 
    culture, however, the message carried to the general public was one 
    of transvestism as utility, and was actively used as a tool to 
    propagate the benefits of binary gender. Certainly in England, 
    literature on both female cross-dressing and hermaphroditism 
    abounded in the seventeenth century, and despite the regulation of 
    both the practice of transvestism and the legal status of 
    hermaphrodites, a full review of Early English Books Online and 
    Medieval and Early Modern Sources Online has yet to reveal any 
    restriction on this type of 
    printing.29Available at 
    http://eebo.chadwyck.com/ and 
    www.tannerritchie.com/memso.php Although the appearance 
    of hermaphrodites in print, both art and scientific, displays both 
    the high level of acceptance for a third sex as well as the public 
    knowledge of it, by no means all, or even the majority, of the 
    literature is complimentary. What it does show is that the wider 
    public knew of deviation from the ‘normal’ established by the Kirk 
    and church, an ideal which played a very important role in church 
    functionality. The vast majority of cross-dressed female-to-male 
    figures in early-modern culture, with the exception of those found 
    in pornographic literature, became transvestites for practical 
    purposes. The majority of female transvestites of the early-modern 
    period, both fictional and non-fictional, shunned the idea of 
    women’s affection towards them while dressed as men, and most of 
    those end up with well sought after male lovers. To the contrary, 
    male garb was often a device for achieving authority temporarily in 
    order to prove oneself to a man, only to step down from that 
    authority once feasible. 
    30James Saslow, ‘Homosexuality 
    in the Renaissance’, 96 – 98; Faderman, Surpassing the 
    Love, 16 – 17; Linda Woodbridge, Women and the 
    English Renaissance: Literature and the Nature of 
    Womenkind (Chicago, 1984) 139 – 158.
Although most of the surviving plays from the seventeenth 
    century were written and performed in England, they still help to 
    demonstrate present and circulating ideas in Britain, and for that 
    reason are worth consideration. Comparison of English and Scottish 
    broadside ballads throughout the seventeenth century demonstrates a 
    clear trend of reprinting English literature in Scotland, and vice 
    versa, and therefore it is not unfeasible to assume that residents 
    of both kingdoms could be exposed to such 
    entertainment.31A comparison 
    of the Bodleian Library broadsheet collection and the ‘Word on the 
    Street’ collection at the National Library of Scotland reveals a 
    number of broadsheets printed first in London, then reprinted in 
    Edinburgh. The majority are intact, but a few were edited for a 
    Scottish audience. For the majority of the sixteenth and 
    seventeenth centuries, the practice of female transvestism 
    flourished in the theatre. Both Shakespeare and his contemporaries 
    took a liking to the idea of the female cross-dresser, as well as 
    to the confusion in visual identity cross-dressing caused. One of 
    the many Shakespearean examples of this is the figure of 
    Viola/Cesario in the comedy Twelfth Night 
    (1601).32Traub, 
    Renaissance of Lesbianism, 56 – 57; Lisa 
    Jardine, Reading Shakespeare Historically 
    (London, 1996), 66 – 67. The female character of Viola, 
    in love with the already lovesick Orsino, disguises herself as a 
    man (Cesario) for her safety, and in the process infiltrates 
    Orsino’s court and his company. Viola/Cesario quickly becomes 
    embroiled in two courtships, hers of Orsino and Olivia’s, the 
    countess Orsino had loved, of Cesario. Olivia’s accidental lesbian 
    interest is used as an implied, but obvious, joke which depicts the 
    laughable light in which female-to-female sexuality was held. 
    Furthermore, Olivia/Cesario refers to her transvestite self as a 
    ‘little monster,’ using the vernacular slang for hermaphrodite, 
    further evidence for a common knowledge of 
    hermaphroditism.33William 
    Shakespeare, Twelfth Night. Act III, Scene IV, 
    Lines 302 – 303; Fletcher Beaumont, Poems. The Golden 
    Remains of those so Much Admired Dramatick Poets (London, 
    1660), 20. Unlike other Shakespearean cross-dressing 
    women, Viola seems the most comfortable remaining in her disguise, 
    and her rationale for cross-dressing is the most fluid, choosing to 
    stay a male as long as it continues to benefit her. Her subsequent 
    sparks of romance between Orsino while dressed as Cesario, 
    therefore seem to ring true as homosexually-based than 
    heterosexually, given the fact that marriage between a 
    hermaphrodite and a man was 
    forbidden.34Ibid., 50; Daniel 
    Boyarin, ‘Are There Any Jews in “The History of Sexuality”?’, 
    Journal of the History of Sexuality, 5 (1995), 
    333 – 355; Shakespeare, Twelfth Night. Act IV, 
    Scene I, Lines 53, 63; Lisa Jardine, Reading Shakespeare, 
    72.
Shakespeare’s other great comedic cross-dressing character is 
    Rosalind, who becomes Ganymede in As You Like It 
    (1600). Again the cross dressed female is fervently pursued by a 
    woman, Phebe, who, like Olivia, is a medium for humour in regards 
    to her ill-placed affections, and drops all romantic inklings once 
    she discovers her love to be female. Rosalind initially becomes 
    Ganymede in order to avoid persecution, a relatively common 
    occurrence in the period, and its presence in popular entertainment 
    of the period is striking. Many years later, Prince James, later 
    James VII & II, cross-dressed for similar reasons and became a 
    woman to escape the palace at 
    Whitehall.35David Stevenson, 
    ‘Halkett , Anne , Lady Halkett (1623 – 1699)’, Oxford 
    Dictionary of National Biography, www.oxforddnd.com 
    [accessed 13 October 2013]; The Memoirs of Anne, Lady Halkett and 
    Ann, Lady Fanshawe, J. Loftis (ed.) (Oxford, 1979), 48 – 
    49. Similarly, Portia of The Merchant of 
    Venice (1596 – 1598?) and her handmaid cross dresses 
    briefly and for a very specific need. Here, her need to save her 
    beloved’s friend prompts her to assume male clothing, which 
    therefore allows her to assume male privilege and practice law. The 
    fact that while cross dressed neither woman’s fiancé can recognise 
    them speaks a great deal to the importance of dress as an 
    identifier in the period. Portia and her significant other carry on 
    a lengthy, close-proximity dialogue, and it is not farfetched when 
    he completely fails to recognise her. Immediately following this 
    incident, she and her maid return home and go back to feminine 
    clothing. This type of cross-dressing was not encouraged, but was 
    more socially acceptable, as both women are aware of their female 
    identity and make no attempt to pass as men for the long term.
Of the transvestite women of the early-modern stage, few are as 
    well known as Moll Cutpurse. Otherwise known as Mary Frith, she was 
    an actual woman who became the focus of two plays, John Day’s 
    The Madde Pranckes of Mery Mall of the Bankside 
    (1610), and more famously, Thomas Deckker and John Middleton’s 
    The Roaring Girl 
    (1611).36Thomas Middleton, 
    The Roaring Girl (London, 1627) 1 – 10; the text 
    of John Day’s play on Frith has since been lost. Both 
    were written during her lifetime, although only the latter 
    survives. In contrast to the prior transvestite characters who were 
    purely fictional and did not practice transvestism as a lifestyle, 
    Mary Frith was a well known transvestite and bawd of the time. Her 
    situation, both in fiction and reality, is unique but possibly 
    sheds light on the overall social acceptance of transvestism. 
    Despite linking her cross-dressing to her rowdy and sometimes 
    criminal behaviour, The Roaring Girl is 
    generally complimentary, holding Frith in a heroic light. The play 
    portrays a man and woman who would like to get married, but his 
    father sees her as a less than ideal choice of bride. He instead 
    tells his parents that he will marry Moll Cutpurse, citing her 
    thievery and dress, to which his father responds by referring to 
    Moll as a ‘man-woman’, a term more commonly used to refer to 
    feminine men. By the end of the play, she is allowed to defend her 
    honour by first duelling a man who claims all women are whores, and 
    then by demonstrating a desire to protect honest individuals from 
    those like her. In a sense, she transcends and overcomes her 
    transvestism by proving herself to be more than her appearance. In 
    life, she was investigated for her transvestism and her sexuality 
    questioned, but she was never arrested.
A possible explanation for her acceptance, again postulated by 
    Faderman, is that Frith was so unconventional, she became a type of 
    character which urban culture became fond of, and understanding 
    this the government hesitated to remove 
    her.37Faderman, 
    Surpassing the Love, 57 – 58; Faderman suggests 
    that all actresses received special treatment if they 
    cross-dressed, on account of their celebrity status. 
    Concerning her sexuality, no concrete evidence has been found 
    either way, and there is nothing to indicate that her dress habits 
    had anything to do with a sexual identity, but corresponded more to 
    her masculine, domineering personality. Frith is one of the few, if 
    valuable, examples of women who cross-dressed as a lifestyle 
    without persecution or prosecution for suspected tribadism, 
    demonstrating that society as a whole did not necessarily 
    automatically associate transvestite appearance with homosexuality, 
    but, if anything, with generally anti-social behaviour.
Much of irony of having transvestite characters in theatre comes 
    from the fact that until 1660 men played all women’s roles. Along 
    with an understanding towards the female character who 
    cross-dresses for a logical, need-based situation, the audience is 
    then required to have an understanding towards male transvestism. 
    As patrons of the theatre, they demonstrated a mild respect for the 
    practice. After the Restoration, when women appear on the stage for 
    the first time, this need for understanding disappears almost 
    entirely. A sign of the changing attitudes towards transvestism in 
    culture comes from this additional preface from a post-Restoration 
    performance of Othello. In this edition, 
    Desdemona’s actress appeared on stage before the beginning of the 
    play and states:
The woman plays today: mistake me not,
No man in gown, or page in petticoat …
… in this reforming age
We have intents to civilise our 
    stage.38Cited in Guy 
    Boas, Shakespeare and the Young Actor (London, 
    1974), 6; Vita Fortunati, ‘The Female Page: Tranvestism and 
    Ambiguity in Elizabethan Theatre Roles’ in R. Baccolini (ed.) 
    Forme drammatiche e tradizione al femminile nel teatro 
    inglese (Urbino, 1991), 1-2.
Her statement that they intend to ‘civilise’ beyond the use of 
    transvestism is striking, as prior to the reign of Charles II, no 
    one would have found male transvestism in entertainment 
    uncivilised. This marks a mental change in cross-dressing from 
    simply an eccentric practice to one linked to a particular type of 
    person.
Not all fiction concerning tribades and transvestites was 
    reputable, and the seventeenth century saw a host of erotica 
    featuring such female deviants, indicating both a common knowledge 
    of the practice and a carnal interest in 
    it.39William Naphy, 
    Born to be Gay: A History of Homosexuality 
    (Stroud, 2006), 161. The pieces, many written in France 
    then re-published in England, appeared equally before and after the 
    Restoration, indicating no obvious connection between this sexual 
    deviation and the loose moral structure brought about by Charles 
    II. William Naphy, in his book Sex Crimes from Renaissance 
    to Enlightenment, argues that women likely had access to 
    this literature, despite men being its intended 
    audience.40William Naphy, 
    Sex Crimes from Renaissance to Enlightenment 
    (Stroud, 2002), 157 – 159. In a subsequent book, 
    published four years later, he states that lack of women’s literacy 
    probably barred them from viewing such things, and that a noted 
    decline lesbian erotica 
    occurred in the nineteenth century, and must have been linked to a 
    rise in women’s literacy. Although the later opinion may work for 
    an extremely broad analysis, it fails to take into consideration 
    the Reformation rise in literacy that occurred in Britain, 
    especially in Scotland. The details common between these pieces of 
    erotica is an aspect of older women ‘educating’ younger women on 
    sex, as well as some use of a strap-on prosthetic phallus, 
    something illegal and punishable by death in real life 
    practice.41Peter Aretine, 
    Strange Nevves from Bartholomew-Fair, or, the 
    Wandring-Whore (London, 1661), 3 – 4. Jean Barrin, 
    Venus in the Cloister, Or The Nun in her Smock 
    (London, 1683), 6 – 9; Anon., The Whore’s Rhetorick 
    Calculated to the Meridian of London, and Conformed to the Rules of 
    Art (London, 1683), 5 – 10. The presence of 
    tribade erotica certainly does not prove that such women were 
    reading it, or that it encouraged tribade behaviour, but it does 
    suggest that tribade and gender-blurring behaviour existed in the 
    period, at least in a large enough degree to inspire such authors 
    and be vaguely known in common consciousness.
