In 2002 , I was commissioned by harpist Catriona McKay to write The Salutation , a piece for clarsach and electroacoustic sound . Following this , we began to work on projects combining improvisation with live electronics , rather than creating fixed , pre-recorded electroacoustic parts . Some of this work , especially the ensemble projects , has clear connections to Scottish traditional music , principally through a preponderance of melodic material . Alongside this , the work of our duo , Strange Rainbow , is much more connected to our experiences in other genres and contexts , often exploring sound for its own sake . I hope to show how through this work we have developed a practice based on ' scales of dislocation ' that relocates the clarsach and allows our music to function in multiple musical contexts . 
Simon Emmerson ( 2012 ) discusses ' location ' of live electronic music and considers the ' relocation of the live ' ( p. 8 ) that technology brings about . He explores the nature of liveness of performance in space , time and causality , and suggests the idea of ' meaningful response ' as a way to measure the effectiveness of interactivity . He says : 
A performer might ask ' where are we ? ' in reference to a printed score or given structure within the ( perhaps unwritten ) music ; but this question can also be asked with respect to a venue , furthermore we can ask it about a historical or sociological ' position ' . It seems that this question is the most comprehensive it is possible to ask ! ( Emmerson , 2012 , p. 8 ) 
In this paper I want to look at how the practice I have developed with Catriona McKay has allowed us to relocate the clarsach , a particularly Scottish instrument , in relation to its traditional identity and in different musical contexts , and how we have developed an interactive environment that facilitates ' meaningful response ' . 
In composing The Salutation I wanted to find a way of locating the clarsach in a consciously Scottish frame and to draw , as far as possible , on the instrument 's Scottish identity within the bounds of my own musical language , which is rooted in contemporary classical , electroacoustic music . The reason for doing so was that , although the commission was for an electroacoustic piece , Catriona wanted music that she could perform in a programme of traditional Scottish music , rather than something intended for a concert of contemporary classical music . While I had composed for instruments and ' tape ' or live electronics in the past , I had always avoided bringing extra-musical references ( recognisably real-world , non-instrumental sounds or references to other musics ) into these works , so this was a significant challenge for me . Throughout the process I was concerned not to lose sight of the clarsach : its characteristic sound , the physical and mechanical constraints of instrument and performer and the ' baggage ' it brings with it as an instrument of folk history and culture . At the back of my mind were both my reading around that time of Hugh Trevor-Roper 's ( albeit exaggerated ) portrayal of ' Scottishness ' as a nineteenth century constructed mythology ( Hobsbawm and Ranger , 1983 ) , and an awareness of my own family 's constructed Scottish mythology ( one completely invented by my grandfather that prompted my parents to give me my Scottish first name , and that we only discovered to be fictitious years after his death ) . I therefore approached the task of composing something intended to be consciously ' Scottish ' , for a specifically Scottish audience , with some caution , avoiding musical pastiche and trying to incorporate signifiers of cultural identity . These would include sounds of the instrument , of place , of speech and other recognisable sounds referenced in the spoken words . 
The clarsach is the Scottish member of the Celtic harp family . The earliest known examples date back over a thousand years and , along with the Great Highland Pipes , it was an instrument of high status in the courts of clan chiefs up until the eighteenth century and so holds an important place in Scottish cultural history . Keith Sanger and Alison Kinnaird ( 1992 ) provide a detailed history of the instrument devoted largely to the period from the earliest records to its decline , which ran in parallel with that of Gaelic culture and patronage in the eighteenth century . Their invaluable work in rediscovering ancient repertoire laid the foundation for the revival of the instrument and its music over the past 40 years . Now a very familiar instrument in contemporary Scottish traditional music , its repertoire comprises music from the past along with a large body of work composed by contemporary players . This largely sits within and around the generic forms associated with Scottish traditional music , particularly dance forms such as reel , jig , strathspey and waltz , along with airs and other slower music . In addition , as contemporary Scottish traditional musicians absorb , at an ever increasing rate , influences from many other traditions and genres , the clarsach music we hear is ancient , modern , Scottish and global in origin . Nevertheless , the sound of the instrument ( notwithstanding the differences between ancient and modern instruments , which also continue to evolve ) is associated with a broadly Celtic identity , and certainly within Scotland an audience for Scottish traditional music would consciously ascribe ' Scottishness ' to it in the same way as it might to the Great Highland Pipes . 
In previous electroacoustic works without instruments I had made reference to place . These include Busk ( with Nicholas Virgo , 1988 ) , based on the sounds of street musicians in Birmingham , Final Times ( 1998 ) , an audio portrait of Glasgow , and Bound for Glory ( 2002 ) , set in southern Poland . There are also two works for dance , Making of Maps ( 1992 ) and So Many Islands ( 1996 ) , which more generally reference city and coastline , respectively . So , I decided to use sounds of place to help situate the music of The Salutation . I chose to begin with a recording I had made of Margaret Hughes , a 90-year-old woman from Buckie in the North East of Scotland , recalling her time as a ' fisher quine ' ( ' quine ' , a Scots word for a young woman ) in the 1930s herring industry in Shetland . Margaret 's voice gave me a distinctive accent along with a specifically Scottish narrative which referenced a specific time in the past , a subject ( ' the herrin' fishin' ... ' ) and a place ( Shetland – Margaret talks about working in the town of Lerwick ) . Her words also hint at other , less specific things that allowed me to incorporate exterior , environmental sounds ( the sea , gulls , fishing boats , a harbour ) and the domestic setting of Margaret 's reminiscences ( the sound of a grandfather clock ) . I use only fragments of Margaret 's story but these fragments are enough to situate the narrative ( ' I belong up North in Buckie ... aye , when I was sixteen ... 1939 at the guttin' ... at the herrin' fishin' ... you worked three o' ye ... two o' ye an' a packer ... three in a crew ... gutted and packed ... herrin' barrels ... thruppence the hour ... at the herrin' fishin' ... ' , and so on ) . These spoken fragments were combined with the other recordings and additional recorded clarsach sounds to create the electroacoustic part . So , while the live instrument has been dislocated from its familiar musical surroundings , the combination of clarsach-based sound and recognisable , ' referential ' sounds , along with melodic elements , creates a sonic context for my more fragmented , less idiomatic instrumental writing . If this works for its intended audience , as I believe it does , it relies not on knowledge of electroacoustic repertoire but rather on a shared experience of sound design in film and television ( which , of course , can also be an important point of reference for the expert audience ) . 
The process of composing the clarsach part for The Salutation was collaborative and to some extent improvisatory . In writing the score , I worked closely with Catriona to unpick some of the instrument 's and specifically her characteristics , idiomatic gestures and sounds . The live clarsach part moves between texture and gesture , relating and reacting to the voice and environmental sounds . Catriona 's love of reshaping simple arpeggios , her characteristic rhythmic driving chords and intricate high , repeated , improvised patterns all find their way into the writing . At the opening , for example , as the regular ticking of a clock gradually morphs into the arrhythmic clicking of rigging on ships ' masts , simple repeated notes are gradually subsumed into more complex irregular note textures . Interjections of speaking voice are mirrored by broken clusters of notes which themselves suggest fragments of an imagined or half-remembered melody . Later in the piece , melodic writing is woven in , emerging from pitched , electroacoustic textures and rapid , repeated ( diatonic ) clusters , and gradually becoming fragmented in both register and meter as extra-musical sounds return . 
The Salutation was to become the first step in a lasting collaboration to which we have both brought a range of musical experience . As improvisation was already part of our own practices , and as this had been part of the compositional process , it became our environment and methodology for further exploration . My own practice as a composer in the electroacoustic studio has always acknowledged the performative , improvisational and playful opportunities that the studio affords . Alongside this I had also had the opportunity to work with some extraordinary improvisers from the world of free jazz ( including Paul Dunmall , 1997-2001 , and Keith Tippett , 1999 ) , I had improvised with dancers / choreographers ( including Sue MacLennan & Company , 1993 , and Anna Krzystek , 2000-2002 ) and I was soon to make large-scale , performative and improvisatory interactive installations ( Sensuous Geographies with Sarah Rubidge , 2002-2003 ; Sea Unsea with Carol Brown and Mette Ramsgard Thomsen , 2005-2006 ) . I also brought experience of writing fixed electroacoustic pieces as well as works with instruments and voices , and I had much experience performing electroacoustic work by other composers ( working with Sonic Arts Network , 1985-2002 , and Birmingham Electroacoustic Sound Theatre , 1985-1995 ) . Though Catriona is known principally as a clarsach player , as a soloist and in other contexts , she also plays organ and pedal harp . Improvisation has been part of her musical practice throughout her career and she is a member of the Glasgow Improvisers ' Orchestra and other improvising groups . She is a prolific composer , largely of new traditional music , and is in demand as a player of contemporary harp music . 
Throughout our work together since The Salutation we have continued to develop our sonic resources . For Catriona , improvisation has always been a place to explore different ways of playing the clarsach . For example , she uses plectra , guitar steels , and less conventional objects such as knitting needles and battery-powered fans , to prepare ( in the sense of John Cage 's prepared piano ) or excite the strings . She also draws on harp techniques from other cultures , for example , that of playing hard , damped glissandi , which is something she found listening to Patagonian harp playing . I have continued to collect sounds of place and other ' realworld ' reference . At the same time , I developed ( and continue to refine ) a collection of software tools and control interface mapping to capture , trigger and process sounds , working with MIDI controllers , sensors , pedals and touchscreen interfaces to achieve the fluid and rapid , performative control of sounds and their transformation . 
The work that followed The Salutation can be divided into two distinct strands . The ensemble projects I shall describe have a musical core close to Catriona 's Scottish traditional music yet also extend that language in ways that Lori Watson describes as ' beyond-tune ' . 
By ' beyond-tune ' , I refer to a piece of music that is longer in length and / or significantly more complex in arrangement , in terms of the textures created by utilising instrumentation , extended performance techniques and harmony , than , as an example , a ' set ' of three reels each consisting of 32 bars of melody with chord accompaniment ( Watson , 2013 , p. 38 ) 
In her research , Watson makes a very useful survey of innovation and innovators in traditional music in Scotland , especially over the last thirty years ( including Catriona 's work , Floe ) . This is perhaps the most appropriate ' lens ' through which to understand this strand of our work . 
