Stimulating Production Activity in Scotland: Advance Party 
    and the Rule Doctrine
Linda Hutcheson, Independent Scholar
This article centres on Advance Party – a Dogma-inspired 
    initiative devised by Glasgow-based Sigma Films and Denmark's 
    Zentropa. Two schemes have been launched under the Advance Party 
    banner. The first, announced in 2003, was intended to produce three 
    films, but resulted in two: the debut features of Andrea Arnold 
    (Red Road, 2006) and Morag McKinnon 
    (Donkeys, 2010). The second, larger scheme, 
    which also involved Dublin-based Subotica Films, was launched six 
    years later in 2009. However five years on (June 2014), as I will 
    discuss, the scheme appears to have floundered.
The motivations underpinning Advance Party are explored in the 
    course of this article. A central idea underpinning Advance Party 
    was collaboration and, particularly in the case of the first 
    scheme, a desire to develop a filmmaking community in Scotland – or 
    perhaps more specifically Glasgow. Arguably however, the goal of 
    collaboration was not achieved. This factor, along with the 
    unrealised status of many of the Advance Party films, suggests that 
    the achievements of Advance Party were minimal, especially when 
    compared to those of Dogma 95, the cinematic movement that inspired 
    Advance Party. Yet, to dismiss the value of Advance Party is 
    perhaps premature, especially as one of the resulting films, 
    Red Road, achieved considerable critical acclaim 
    and went on to secure distribution in over twenty-five territories 
    – a feat that, as I discuss in a prior edition of this journal 
    (Hutcheson 2012), is an impressive achievement. As this earlier 
    article also outlines, while Advance Party failed to produce films 
    after Red Road and Donkeys, 
    many Scotland-based projects fail to enter into production. When 
    framed in this context, Advance Party can be seen as having 
    provided a structure and legitimacy to projects that they might 
    have lacked individually. In this sense, Advance Party can be 
    viewed as a means of stimulating production activity in Scotland. 
    Nonetheless, as becomes apparent, the shortcomings of the schemes 
    are also important and offer insights into Advance Party’s wider 
    impact on film production in Scotland.
Advance Party: Origins and Intentions
Inspired by the successes of the Dogma 95 movement, Advance 
    Party similarly adopted a rule-governed approach to filmmaking. A 
    stunt with sincere intentions, Dogma 95 proclaimed itself to be a 
    ‘rescue action’ (as cited in Hjort & MacKenzie 2003a, p. 199) 
    for cinema. Citing digital technology as a democratising force, the 
    Dogma manifesto presented a set of ten rules, known collectively as 
    the Vow of Chastity, aimed at countering the frivolous plots and 
    unnecessary flashy visuals the Dogma brethren viewed as ubiquitous 
    within cinema. Included in the Vow of Chastity were the 
    stipulations that participating directors must shoot their film on 
    location and use hand-held cameras, available lighting and Academy 
    35mm film format. Amongst the remaining rules were the conditions 
    that the films must not contain ‘superficial action’ (e.g. murders, 
    weapons, etc.), belong to a genre, or credit the director (for the 
    full manifesto see Hjort & MacKenzie 2003a, pp. 199-200). The 
    first three Dogma films, Festen/The 
    Celebration (Vinterberg 1998), 
    Idioterne/The Idiots (von 
    Trier 1999) and Mifunes sidste 
    sang/Mifune (Kragh-Jacobsen 1999), 
    successfully secured international distribution and effectively 
    illustrated to the filmmaking community that low budget, innovative 
    films had the potential to sell worldwide. While the first Dogma 
    films were those directed by the Danish Dogma founders, Thomas 
    Vinterberg, Lars von Trier, Søren Kragh-Jacobsen and Kristian 
    Levring (The King is Alive, 2000), and with the 
    exception of Vinterberg’s film, were produced by von Trier’s 
    production company Zentropa, filmmakers in other countries quickly 
    took up the Dogma challenge.1 Concurrently, 
    the framework continued to prove popular amongst filmmakers and 
    audiences in Denmark.2
Mette Hjort (2010) writes that the initial idea for a 
    partnership between Zentropa and Scotland’s Sigma Films was first 
    suggested by Sigma Films co-founder Gillian Berrie at a meeting 
    with John Archer, then Chief Executive of Scottish Screen; Lenny 
    Crooks, then director of Glasgow Film Office (GFO); and a 
    representative from Trust Film Sales, after a showing of von 
    Trier’s Dancer in the Dark (2000) at the 
    Edinburgh International Film Festival in 2000. This collaboration 
    eventually resulted in the Advance Party initiative. In a deviation 
    from the open-ended scope of Dogma 95, for reasons discussed below, 
    the number of directors participating in Advance Party was capped 
    at three. At the time, the directors chosen by Sigma Films and 
    Zentropa, Andrea Arnold, Morag McKinnon and Mikkel Nørgaard, each 
    had successful shorts, but had not yet transitioned into features. 
    Moreover, unlike the Dogma movement, which was not contained within 
    the parameters of any one nation, incorporated in the Advance Party 
    rules was the condition that the directors must set and film their 
    project in Scotland. The rules state: ‘The films take place 
    in Scotland but apart from that the writers are free to place them 
    anywhere according to geography, social setting or ethnic 
    background’ (Scherfig & Jensen 2003, as cited in Verve 
    Pictures, 2006, p. 4). This move was intended to transfer some of 
    the benefits of Dogma 95 to a Scottish milieu, although despite 
    this freedom, Red Road, 
    Donkeys, and Nørgaard’s unmade project, entitled 
    The Old Firm, all ended up being set in Glasgow 
    (for more on the Glasgow setting of Advance Party, see Hutcheson 
    2013).
Further Advance Party rules stipulated that the three films must 
    be shot on location over a period of six weeks, use digital 
    technology and adhere to a budgetary ceiling of £1.2 million. In a 
    further key divergence from Dogma 95, the three Advance Party films 
    were designed to be united through a means rendered explicitly 
    visible onscreen, as they were each to feature the same group of 
    characters, played by the same actors – a rule that one of the 
    films, Donkeys, eventually defied. Zentropa’s 
    Lone Scherfig and Anders Thomas Jensen created sketches for seven 
    characters and together the three participating directors were 
    allowed to create two more (Hjort 2010; for abbreviated character 
    sketches see GFO, n.d.). To date two of the three films have been 
    completed and released: Arnold’s Red Road (2006) 
    and McKinnon’s Donkeys (2010). Nørgaard’s 
    project, The Old Firm, never materialised.
Drawing on interviews with those working at Sigma Films and 
    Zentropa, Hjort (2010) points to the imbalance between the 
    prosperous Danish filmmaking landscape and the comparatively 
    struggling Scottish environment as a way of explaining the 
    intentions that underpinned the scheme. On this difference, Hjort 
    cites Sigma Films’ Gillian Berrie as stating:
In Denmark they have in excess of £25m (about U.S. $50 
    million) a year to put into films. They get up and they go to work 
    and they make films every day, whereas filmmakers here get to make 
    one film every three years, if they get to make films at all. 
    (2010, p. 53)
In addition to outlining the disparity in levels of finance, 
    Hjort also quotes Scotland-based director, writer and producer 
    Eleanor Yule in order to outline a difference between the 
    filmmaking culture in Scotland and that in Denmark. Yule states:
When you go to Filmbyen, the film city where Zentropa and 
    other companies are based, you see everyone helping one another 
    out. It means you breed a more collaborative environment, but 
    there’s also the expectation that you will be making films for 
    cinema regularly. In Scotland it feels like a lottery at every step 
    of the process. We are not self-sufficient in the same way. (2010, 
    p. 53)
Yule’s comments regarding the collaborative ethos of Zentropa 
    and its production complex Filmbyen/Film Town are particularly 
    important to note as they point to the collectivist spirit of the 
    Dogma movement, and the collaborative intentions of the Advance 
    Party scheme. Importantly however, the reformist rhetoric 
    underpinning the collective stance of Dogma was all but absent in 
    the case of Advance Party, which unlike its predecessor, was not 
    accompanied by a manifesto.
Dogma 95, Lars von Trier and the Rule Doctrine
Of all the Dogma brothers (von Trier, Vinterberg, Levring and 
    Kragh-Jacobsen), the manifesto and accompanying Vow of Chastity can 
    most clearly be linked to the work of von Trier. The films in his 
    first trilogy – Forbrydelsens 
    element/Element of Crime (1984), 
    Epidemic (1987) and Europa 
    (1991) – were each accompanied by a manifesto, as were his 
    subsequent films and projects. Dogma marks a shift in von Trier’s 
    role from individual filmmaker to collective leader. The latter 
    role extended beyond Dogma to the creation of Film Town (see Hjort, 
    2006) and other projects including The World 
    Clock (see Schepelern 2003), The Five 
    Obstructions (Leth & von Trier 2003; see Hjort 2006) 
    and Advance Party. This notion of collectivism is evident in the 
    rhetoric used in the Dogma manifesto. After describing Dogma 95 as 
    ‘a collective of film directors’, the manifesto goes on to 
    assert:
In 1960 enough was enough! The movie was dead and called 
    for resurrection. The goal was correct but the means were not! The 
    new wave proved to be a ripple that washed ashore and turned to 
    muck.
Slogans of individualism and freedom created works for a 
    while, but no changes….The auteur concept was bourgeois romanticism 
    from the very start and thereby…false!
To DOGME 95 cinema is not individual! (As cited in Hjort 
    & MacKenzie 2003a, p. 199)
The denunciation of the individualist stance the manifesto 
    associates with the auteur concept – and in particular the work of 
    the New Wave directors – was explicitly prohibited in the Vow of 
    Chastity through rule number ten: ‘The director must not be 
    credited’ (Hjort & MacKenzie 2003a, p. 200). As multiple 
    commentators note, this sentiment and its accompanying rule are 
    juxtaposed by the distinct authorial style of the first wave of 
    Danish Dogma films (The Celebration, 
    The Idiots, Mifune and 
    The King is Alive), and the films of the 
    subsequent second wave of Danish directors that took up the Dogma 
    baton (including: Italiensk for 
    begyndere/Italian for Beginners, 
    Scherfig 2000; Et rigtigt 
    menneske/Truly Human, Sandgren 2001; 
    En kærlighedshistorie/Kira’s Reason: A 
    Love Story, Madsen 2001; and, Elsker dig for 
    evigt/Open Hearts, Bier 2002).
Additionally, the individual tendencies of the Dogma instigators 
    are reflected in the rules governing the scheme. The rules, as well 
    as constituting a response to Hollywood filmmaking practices 
    insomuch that they prohibited the use of conventional mainstream 
    techniques (sets, props, sound effects, non-diegetic music, complex 
    camera and lighting setups, genre tropes and so on), were also 
    designed to confront the tendencies of the manifesto’s creators. As 
    Hjort (2003) outlines, both von Trier and Vinterberg claim to have 
    devised the rules on one basic principle: ‘Identify the very means 
    of cinematic expression on which you habitually rely and then make 
    the technique or technology in question the object of an 
    interdiction’ (p. 34). In von Trier’s case this led to a ban on 
    lighting (rule number four), and in Vinterberg’s, an abolition of 
    non-diegetic sound (rule number two). The rules however, were also 
    intended as a guide for aspiring filmmakers. They were to enable 
    first-time directors to take advantage of what the manifesto terms 
    the raging ‘technological storm’ (as cited in Hjort & MacKenzie 
    2003a, p. 199) in order to produce a low-cost feature.
Advance Party: Underlying Motivations
While similar factors to those outlined in relation to Dogma 95 
    are evident in the motivations underpinning Advance Party, crucial 
    differences between their impulses also exist. As noted, in her 
    interview-based research, Hjort (2010) points to the disparity 
    between the Scottish and Danish filmmaking environments as 
    instigating the development of Advance Party. Hjort (2010) cites 
    Berrie as identifying two key problems in Scotland: the absence of 
    sufficient training opportunities and a difficulty in transitioning 
    from shorts to features (see also Hutcheson 2012). As a means of 
    combating these issues, Advance Party was aimed at first time 
    filmmakers. This focus helps to explain the ‘practical’ rules 
    governing the scheme: that the projects must be filmed on location, 
    over a period of six weeks, using digital technology and a budget 
    not exceeding £1.2 million. These stipulations reduced production 
    costs and thereby created a relatively low risk environment in 
    which three first time directors could practice their craft. 
    Additionally, the Advance Party framework offered development 
    support to its participating directors. The three filmmakers took 
    part in workshops held at Zentropa’s Film Town. These involved 
    discussions with Scherfig about the Advance Party characters and 
    conversations with von Trier about the philosophy underpinning the 
    initiative, as well as practical workshops with Film Town’s 
    post-production and distribution staff (GFO 2006).
