2. Performing Striated Space
Our mapping process is influenced by concepts of mobility drawn 
    from nomadic theory: the condition of nomadism; and an attempt to 
    incorporate a nomadic form of mobility into our regular journeys. 
    Drawing on the “nomadology” of Deleuze and Guattari [19], and Rosi 
    Braidotti [20], we aim to document a performative 
    “counterpractice”, learning more about our own commuting routes by 
    considering alternative ways of traveling between two sites, and 
    examining our exiting daily journeys through the lens of these key 
    theorists of contemporary mobilities. Before discussing our own 
    experiences, it will therefore be valuable to consider the 
    potential for, and limitations of, a nomadic form of commuting.
As we have discussed, commuting is often portrayed as a 
    problematically limited, constrained and regulated mobile practice. 
    In contrast, Pearson sees the nomad as an aspirational figure, “cut 
    free of roots, bonds and fixed identities” ([21], p. 20). Nomadism 
    offers a valuable counterpoint to commuting, then, but it is a 
    concept that we are anxious about adopting too readily without 
    confronting some of the potential problems with its use. As Tim 
    Creswell points out, although the metaphor lends itself to an 
    antiessentialist discourse that emphasises “the importance of 
    becoming” over that of destinations, the use of the nomad in 
    Western intellectual thought is essentially “a form of imaginative 
    neo-colonialism” which uses the non-Western other to project 
    romanticised notions of mobility against the sedentary power 
    relations of the State ([22], p. 47, 54). Embracing the concept of 
    the nomad runs the risk of ignoring “who travels and why” ([23], p. 
    361).
These questions are particularly pertinent to a discussion of 
    commuting, as a mobile practice that is constituted through 
    significant social and economic hierarchies. Gil Viry et al. 
    identify a range of factors that lead to inequality in contemporary 
    commuting practices that is predicated on access to certain forms 
    of mobility. These include not owning a car, residential areas with 
    poor access to public transport, and “weak temporal or 
    organisational resources to handle projects that require travel” 
    ([24], p. 121). These factors contribute to an important shift in 
    the way we acquire and build capital in a mobile world, which John 
    Urry refers to as “network capital” ([25], p. 197). The ability to 
    move (or to choose not to move) now constitutes a “major source of 
    advantage” in a society that relies, more than ever before, on 
    systems and processes of mobility ([25], p. 52).
Deleuze and Guattari’s discussion of nomadic forms of mobility 
    provides a valuable aspirational counterpoint to this heavily 
    systematised, regulated and unequal spaces traversed through 
    commuting. Unlike the “striated” space of roads, ferry routes and 
    trainlines that we use to transport ourselves between work and 
    home, nomad space is smooth, defined by “the variability, the 
    polyvocality of directions” ([19], p. 382). Moving within vast, 
    open spaces such as deserts, tundras and steppes, nomads make 
    paths, moving from point to point through the landscape. However, 
    as opposed to sedentary societies, the points of a nomad journey 
    are “strictly subordinated to the paths they determine”, rather 
    than the other way round ([19], p. 380). Importantly, although 
    commuting does not fit easily within this model, this is not to say 
    that the commute precludes a nomadic relationship with the 
    environment:
Even the most striated city gives rise to smooth spaces 
    […] Movements, speed and slowness, are sometimes enough to 
    reconstruct a smooth space. Of course, smooth spaces are not in 
    themselves liberatory. But the struggle is changed or displaced in 
    them, and life reconstitutes its stakes, confronts new obstacles, 
    invents new places, switches adversaries.
([19], p. 500)
Bearing in mind Deleuze and Guattari’s warning that we should 
    “never believe that a smooth space will suffice to save us”, we 
    recognise that our creative explorations of our own commutes are 
    significantly limited in their ability to address the network 
    capital that we require to go “off route”. We are nonetheless 
    setting out on a personal journey to “confront new obstacles” and 
    “reconstitute the stakes” of regular journeys which have 
    occasionally left us feeling “desensitised” to our own bodily 
    experience of the landscapes that we move through. In this way, the 
    example of the nomad offers us a new way of thinking about and 
    experiencing our commutes, rather than reconstituting the systems 
    that contain them and the socio-economic context that we travel 
    within. Deleuze and Guattari’s notion of 
    reconstitution resonates with Braidotti’s 
    concept of nomadism as “a myth, or a political fiction, that allows 
    us to think through and move across established categories and 
    levels of experience” ([20], p. 26). Braidotti advocates “nomadic 
    shifts”; “a performative metaphor that allows for otherwise 
    unlikely encounters and unsuspected sources of interaction, 
    experience and knowledge” ([20], p. 27). In these shifts, our 
    everyday practices are opened up to the creative processes of 
    becoming, offering an “acute awareness of the 
    nonfixity of boundaries” and “the intense desire to go trespassing, 
    transgressing” ([20], p. 66).
Critical appropriations of nomadism have acquired a great deal 
    of currency in postmodern accounts of mobility and it is easy to 
    see how they suit our purpose here. These concepts offer an 
    appealing invitation to the disgruntled daily commuter to leave the 
    striated space of the commute and go “trespassing” and 
    “transgressing”. The details of the specific journey must be taken 
    into account, although the tools we offer can be applied to any 
    commute in an attempt to enact “nomadic shifts”. What mode of 
    transport is employed? Is it public or private? What is the usual 
    pace of this journey? Is the journey open to disruption? Wilkie 
    identifies that discourses of walking practices such as pace, 
    value, autonomy and agency can also be applied to road travel but 
    questions whether “motorvating” actually does open up “previously 
    unavailable opportunities for freedom, escape and subversion” 
    ([16], p. 85) or whether the “democratisation” of road travel has 
    remained mythic for those without network capital.
As pointed out by Janet Wolff, the “suggestion of free and equal 
    mobility is itself a deception, since we don’t all have the same 
    access to the road” ([26], p. 235). As a result, Cresswell has been 
    challenging the “romanticisation of the nomad as the geographic 
    metaphor par excellence: for some time ([22], 
    pp. 42–54); ([23], p. 361). Embracing the metaphor of “generalised 
    heroic figures resisting the confines of a disciplinary society” 
    (itself a specifically postmodern appropriation of a previously 
    vilified cultural figure), is to “gloss over the real differences 
    in power that exist between the theorist and the source domain of 
    the metaphors of mobility” ([23], pp. 378–79). It is important to 
    point out, therefore, that we are not claiming that our creative 
    experiments in the spaces of our daily commutes could be described 
    as nomadic, or indeed that such a thing as nomadic commuting could 
    ever exist, let alone be captured on a map. Rather, we are using 
    “nomadology”, and the creative becoming the myth of the nomad 
    encapsulates, to prompt an alternative way of thinking about 
    quotidian and functional journeys that prioritises creativity and 
    imagination over an assumption of disutility within striated space. 
    We aim to “mobilise metaphors of mobility” by exploring different 
    ways of engaging with the landscapes that we move through between 
    home and work ([22], p. 56). By temporarily departing from our 
    usual modes of transport, we intend to re-perform our own 
    repetitive forms of mobility and reconnect to our regular routes 
    through a series of experimentations with different modes, rhythms 
    and conditions of travel.
