1 . Introductory Remarks 
Our goal in this paper is to revisit an important exchange between Richard Rorty [ 1 ] and Michael Williams [ 2 ] concerning the problem of radical skepticism about the external world ( henceforth just ' radical skepticism ' ) . Contra Williams , Rorty was defending the broadly transcendental anti-skepticism put forward by Donald Davidson [ 3 ] . Williams , in turn , was urging his own distinctive , Wittgenstein-inspired , response to the problem . In order to understand what is going on this debate , and to offer an adjudication , we need to understand the conception of the radical skeptical problem that Williams takes himself to be responding to . To that end , we need to approach our discussion of Rorty and Williams on radical skepticism ( and thereby Davidson and the later Wittgenstein ) by first considering the skeptical challenge as presented by Barry Stroud [ 4 ] . Accordingly , in § 1 we set out Stroud 's conception of radical skepticism and the metaepistemological skeptical challenge that results . In § 2 , we outline Williams 's response to these skeptical challenges . In § 3 , we consider Davidson 's broadly transcendental response to the problem of radical skepticism . Finally , in § 4 , we delve into the details of the debate between Rorty and Williams . Specifically , we argue that it is consistent with Davidson 's transcendental response to the problem of radical skepticism that he was also , following Rorty [ 1 ] , aiming to reveal the philosophical presuppositions that ground that problem . In short , he was also aiming to give what Williams [ 5 ] calls a ' theoretical diagnosis ' of radical skepticism , contra William 's suggestion that he was n't . 
2 . Stroud 's Metaepistemological Skepticism 
Radical skepticism consists of a distinctive type of epistemic evaluation regarding a wide class of beliefs of certain kind . In particular , the radical skeptic is engaged in a form of doubt which is wholesale rather specific , and entirely acontextual . Call these skeptical epistemic practices . How should we understand the relationship between skeptical epistemic practices and the everyday epistemic practices which we employ day-to-day in non-philosophical contexts ? 
On the face of it , there is a stark contrast between the two . For while the skeptical epistemic practices are wholesale , the everyday epistemic practices are markedly piecemeal and local , and while the skeptical epistemic practices are entirely acontextual , the everyday epistemic practices are very sensitive to salient features of the contexts in which epistemic evaluations are undertaken . If this way of thinking about skeptical epistemic practices and their quotidian counterparts is correct , then it puts the radical skeptic at a distinct dialectical disadvantage from the off . For if these two practices of epistemic evaluation are so distinct , then it prompts the natural question of why we ca n't legitimately prefer the counsel of our everyday epistemic practices to the skeptical alternative . We can put the point this way : if radical skepticism constitutes such a departure from our commonsense practices of epistemic evaluation , then what is to stop us from digging in our intellectual heels and insisting on commonsense over the dubious ( on account of its tension with commonsense ) philosophy employed by the radical skeptic ? 
As Stroud [ 4 ] famously argued , however , a compelling case can be made for the claim that radical skepticism , even despite its superficial differences with our everyday epistemic practices , nonetheless arises out these very everyday practices . Stroud 's argument begins in a familiar fashion with Descartes . Stroud argues that if Descartes is right in thinking that all of our sensory experiences are compatible with dreaming , then we must explain how it is nevertheless possible for us to have knowledge of the external world on the basis of experience , if it is possible at all . For Stroud , following Descartes , this meant that a necessary condition of having experiential knowledge of the external world is to know that one is not dreaming – call this Descartes ' condition . Crucially , however , Stroud claims that it is hard to see how we might satisfy Descartes ' condition . Thus it follows that our knowledge of the external world is brought into question 1 See ( [ 4 ] , pp. 20-23 ) for the argument , and [ 6 ] for a restatement of the basic structure of the argument . . 
Thus far , all of this is entirely in keeping a conception of skeptical epistemic practices as being utterly distinct from everyday epistemic practices . The radical skeptic , it seems , is imposing conditions on knowledge , such as Descartes ' condition , which simply would not arise in normal contexts of epistemic evaluation . In normal epistemic contexts , after all , we would never require of an agent before she counted as having perceptual knowledge that she should be able to know that she is not dreaming . The radical skeptic is therefore playing a different epistemic game to the one that we ordinarily play , and hence the onus is on them to offer a defence of their alternative , and contrary to commonsense , system of epistemic evaluation . 
Nonetheless , Stroud insists that despite the superficial differences between these two epistemic practices , the skeptical epistemic practices are rooted in our everyday epistemic practices . In particular , he argues that the condition on perceptual knowledge we just saw employed as a route to skepticism – i.e. , Descartes ' condition – " seems like nothing more than an instance of a familiar commonplace about knowledge . " ( [ 4 ] , p. 24 ) But this is puzzling , since did n't we ( rightly ) just note that our everyday epistemic practices impose no such condition ? 
For Stroud , however , an epistemic principle can be rooted in our everyday epistemic practices without ever being instantiated in them , and this point is crucial to understanding his proposal . In particular , our everyday epistemic practices are constrained in legion ways by all manner of practical limitations – such as limitations of time , or even simply of imagination – which prevent us from applying the epistemic principles that underlie our everyday epistemic practices in a thorough-going fashion . But if we did , claims Stroud , then we would impose conditions on perceptual knowledge such as Descartes ' condition . 
So , for example , in our everyday epistemic practices we require of agents if they are to count as having knowledge that they can rule-out certain error-possibilities which are inconsistent with that knowledge . In order to perceptually know that the creature before me is a goldfinch , for instance , I may be required to know that it is not some other type of bird which might plausibly be in the vicinity , such as a goldcrest 2 This example is , of course , due to Austin [ 7 ] . . Stroud 's idea is that what we are witnessing here is a restricted version of Descartes ' condition , where the motivation for the restriction is purely the practical limitations which are imposed upon us in ordinary contexts . But suppose we removed those restrictions and applied the epistemic principles in play here in a thorough-going way . Would n't we end up implementing Descartes ' condition on perceptual knowledge ? 
Stroud 's idea is thus that the skeptical epistemic practices , while superficially distinct from everyday epistemic practices , are nonetheless rooted in everyday epistemic practices , in the sense that they are simply a ' purified ' version of those everyday practices – i.e. , once we abstract away from the epistemically irrelevant factors such as the practical limitations of time , imagination , and so on , what we are left with are the skeptical epistemic practices . As Stroud ( [ 4 ] , p. 82 ) famously put it , radical skepticism is a paradox in that rather than being the consequence of contentious theoretical claims it instead falls out of " platitudes we would all accept . " If Stroud is right about this , then the tables in the skeptical debate have been turned : For we can no longer plausibly argue that the skeptic is enforcing some arcane , remarkable , or implausible requirement on perceptual knowledge . Instead , one is faced with arguing against an epistemic principle which one , along with most , if not all us , adhere to in otherwise normal circumstances . The dialectical advantage thus goes to the skeptic rather than us . 
Stroud is not himself a skeptic about our knowledge of the external world . But he has argued that it 's not possible to satisfactorily explain how perceptual knowledge of the world is possible ( see [ 8 , 9 ] ) . The reason why this is so should jump off the page . After all , if a necessary condition on perceptual knowledge is just the expression of " platitudes we all accept " , and this condition looks unfulfillable , how could we explain how perceptual knowledge of the world is possible to our satisfaction ? We could n't . What we seek as epistemologists is some kind of equilibrium between commonsensical principles and theoretical reasoning . But do we reach that kind of equilibrium if , according to Stroud , we have to reject a " platitude " – something which " seems like nothing more than an instance of a familiar commonplace about knowledge " ? No . As Stroud acknowledges , what other conception of knowledge do we have except " what is embodied in those procedures and practices " that we follow in everyday circumstances ? 
Call this thesis metaepistemological skepticism . It is a specifically metaepistemological form of skepticism in that it is concerned not with the truth of radical skepticism , but rather with the intellectual palatability of anti-skeptical theories . The specific challenge posed by metaepistemological skepticism is not to solve the radical skeptical problem ( though that would suffice to deal with the challenge ) , but rather to demonstrate that an intellectually plausible resolution of that problem is not ruled out tout court . 
3 . Williams contra Stroud 
Williams [ 5 ] disputes Stroud 's claim that skepticism is the product of a principle which can be teased out of our normal epistemic evaluative practices . Against this , Williams proposes that skepticism is instead the product of certain dispensable philosophical commitments . In this fashion , Williams rejects metaepistemological skepticism . 
However , in some sense Williams can also be understood as a proponent of metaepistemological skepticism . For he holds that we ca n't explain how knowledge of the external world is possible to our satisfaction because he denies that there is knowledge of the external world so-called . So rather than thinking of him as a metaepistemological skeptic , it is better to think of him as maintaining that the epistemological question is just a bad one . The question ' how is perceptual knowledge of the external world possible ? ' is not a question about a kind of knowledge , because he does n't think there are general kinds of knowledge . There is just nothing there from which a general question could be raised : there is no knowledge of the external world , but not because no one knows that there are tables , people , trees , and the like . Instead , Williams thinks that it 's false that " [ b ] eliefs , in virtue of their contents alone , fall into natural epistemological kinds " ( [ 10 ] , p. 419 ) . Following Williams ( [ 5 , 10 ] ) , call this thesis epistemological realism . 
For example , the list we just gave looks like it falls into the 'natural epistemological kind' of knowledge of the external world because it 's about tables , trees , and people . But , as Williams asks , what sows the thread between tables , trees , and people , which is sufficient to ask , in general , how we could ever come to have that kind of knowledge ? The most straightforward answer is ' material objects ' and our general means of coming to know about them , which is ' the senses ' . But Williams thinks that this answer is n't to the point . What is it about the senses which makes knowledge of people , trees , and tables a bona fide kind of knowledge ? According to his diagnosis , it 's that what we know through the senses is ' prior ' to our other knowledge in the sense that one could know that one is having an experience as of a tree before one without knowing that a tree is before one . In general , for each sensory experience one could have , one could know what the experience is like without knowing something about the world around one . Williams calls this foundationalism , and he thinks this is what skepticism hinges on . Foundationalism , in turn , hinges on the truth of epistemological realism . 
Now , it 's important to note that Williams is n't trying to solve the problem of the external world in the sense of giving a positive or negative answer to the question ' how is perceptual knowledge of the world possible ? ' Instead , he gives what he calls a " theoretical diagnosis " of the problem . A theoretical diagnosis would tell us what theoretical commitments the problem of the external world , and its attendant skepticism , are grounded in . Notice that if Williams is right about this – that the problem of the external world presupposes the truth of epistemological realism , a less than commonsensical picture of our epistemological practices – then the burden is shifted back onto the would-be skeptic about the external world . The tables have n't been turned at all 3 For a recent survey of contemporary treatments of radical skepticism , see [ 11 ] . For more specifically on Stroud 's contribution to our understanding of the skeptical problem , see [ 12 , 13 ] . . 
