Introduction
The barrier that separates the audience from performer is a 
    fundamental element of conventional theatrical practice. In the 
    context of much of the avant-garde dance produced throughout the 
    twentieth century, this invisible distinction known as the fourth 
    wall tended to remain unbroken, aiding in the viewer’s willing 
    suspension of disbelief; the spectator became a passive observer in 
    this ultimately rather conformist model. However, in the second 
    half of the century, a number of avant-garde theatre makers began 
    to reject the use of this device, with some renouncing the fourth 
    wall entirely. Peter Handke’s 1966 work, 
    Publikumsbeschimpfung (‘Offending the 
    Audience’), is a striking example of completely plotless theatre, 
    in which the performers address the audience directly throughout, 
    continually reminding them that they are not watching a play, and 
    that none of their theatrical expectations will be satisfied.
Confronting the audience is now a standard element of 
    performance vocabulary in contemporary theatre practice; however, 
    in the Tanztheater of German choreographer Pina 
    Bausch, while performers regularly transgress the boundary between 
    the stage and the audience with sudden or unexpected gestures, the 
    fourth wall is subsequently reinstated, and the process of removal 
    and reinsertion is repeated throughout her durational works. 
    Bausch’s approach is unique in its array of potential meanings; it 
    transgresses the concept of audience immersion, blurring the 
    boundaries of narrative theatre and personal interaction between 
    performer and spectator. This article seeks to create a new 
    framework for understanding the ways in which Bausch’s work tests 
    the limits of theatrical space, going beyond the approaches of 
    Bertolt Brecht and Antonin Artaud, and explores the extent to which 
    Bausch’s spectator is made an active participant in the spectacle 
    through the shifting of boundaries between fiction and (seeming) 
    reality.
Reading Bausch’s methods
Bausch’s inclination to turn the house lights on the audience 
    was an early manifestation of her subversive approach to the fourth 
    wall, a device she used for the first time in her controversial 
    work, Blaubart (1977). 
    Blaubart, alongside the 
    Macbeth-Project which premièred a year later, 
    were landmark productions in the development of her new creative 
    process1; in this fragmentary method, Bausch 
    began to think in terms of questions rather than simply 
    choreographing movements. Blaubart embodies many 
    of the defining elements of Bausch’s approach to theatre, merging 
    dance and elements of traditional drama with pantomime and even 
    opera. The action is constantly interrupted by a cassette player 
    recording; indeed, the soundtrack (a copy of Bartók’s opera 
    referenced in the title) determines the course of the action, 
    almost like an elaborate game of musical chairs. Bausch’s 
    Blaubart breaks from recognisable narrative 
    structures, taking place in an alternative realm where time can be 
    stopped and started, replayed or looped. This production was a 
    dramatic break from Bausch’s previous works, such as 
    Orpheus und Eurydike and Das 
    Frühlingsopfer (‘The Rite of Spring’) (both 1975), which 
    were structured and choreographed according to recognisable 
    narrative patterns.
Rather than immersing themselves in identifiable characters, 
    Bausch’s performers consistently blur the boundary between 
    themselves and their stage personae. That the dancers regularly 
    refer to one another by their own names on stage represents an 
    expression of this character conflation—thus, the distinction 
    between artist and artistic persona is blurred. This device 
    contravenes not only the rules of classical ballet, but largely of 
    dance as a theatrical form. There are, of course, much earlier 
    modern dance exceptions to this tenet, including Mary Wigman’s 
    Totenmal (‘Call of the Dead’) (1930) and Martha 
    Graham’s Deaths and Entrances (1943), as well as 
    postmodern examples including Anna Teresa de Keersmaeker’s 
    Elena’s Aria (1984), all of which experimented 
    with the use of spoken word. However, Bausch’s use of the device 
    transcends more common applications of voice in dance performance; 
    Bausch’s dancers go a step further when they directly address the 
    audience. Still more unsettling are the moments in which the 
    performers simply make eye contact with the spectators, drawing 
    them, not necessarily willingly, into the alternative world that 
    they inhabit. This device is effectively employed in Two 
    Cigarettes in the Dark (1985), where, after declaring the 
    respective ‘prices’ for different parts of their bodies, two female 
    dancers stare directly into the eyes of nearby audience members for 
    several minutes in complete silence. The connection is finally 
    disrupted when one of the women shrugs, smiling, to announce that 
    the intermission has already begun. This simple action is deeply 
    unnerving, leading the spectator to question their role as passive 
    observer of an action that is designed to occur within the 
    boundaries of the stage.
David Price (1990, p.322) has observed that there is a weakness 
    in critical writing on Bausch’s work in its reliance upon Brechtian 
    terminology; he argues that, because of the reliance on viewing her 
    work through this framework, there is no viable vocabulary with 
    which to analyse her pieces, but that:
What distinguishes Bausch, however, is her development of 
    an art form based upon a binary opposition that does not reproduce 
    an either/or dichotomy; instead, Bausch’s productions are both 
    dance and theater. Hers is an art form that rejects a totalizing 
    Wagnerian vision in favor of a dialectical 
    theatricality.
Bausch’s Tanztheater is a conflation of 
    modern dance and avant-garde theatre practice; the relationship 
    between performer and spectator is constantly shifting, clear 
    narratives are put in place and quickly discarded, and choreography 
    is broken down into incessantly repetitive abstractions of everyday 
    movement. Bausch formulated a new language of dance theatre, a 
    methodology that transcends Brechtian concepts of performance. In a 
    similar vein to Price’s observation, we may consider Gabrielle 
    Cody’s (1998, p.119) comment that:
[Bausch’s] tanztheater plays require a multilingual 
    spectatorship, an alternate willingness to see and hear, which is 
    why attempts to encompass her work are inevitably refracted through 
    the graffiti of this century’s most radical theories of 
    performance: Artaud’s cruelty, Brecht’s alienation, Grotowski’s 
    confrontation, and Schechner’s environmental theatre.
Elizabeth Wright (1988) has constructed an interpretation of 
    Bausch’s work in relation to the legacy of Brechtian theatre, 
    applying a range of associated theories, including the alienation 
    effect, to her creative method. However, in this article I have 
    consciously avoided reading Bausch through such established 
    theatrical convention. It is my contention that Bausch’s 
    Tanztheater cannot fit neatly into an Artaudian 
    or Brechtian conception of theatre; rather, her particular method 
    stands independently. The majority of Bausch’s extensive oeuvre 
    inhabits a distinctive and personal vision of theatre, one that, 
    when first presented to the public, was unique in the context of 
    twentieth-century dance.
Tanztheater and manipulation
A significant proportion of critical writing on 
    Tanztheater has attempted to define Bausch’s 
    primary motivation. Writers such as Marianne Goldberg (1989) have 
    focused heavily on issues of gender and violence in her 
    choreography, while Heidi Gilpin (1997) has explored issues 
    relating to cultural identity and the legacy of fascism in Bausch’s 
    work. In her obituary for the choreographer, Susan Manning (2010) 
    details her shifting understanding of Bausch’s relationship to the 
    German postwar experience, asserting that the company’s extensive 
    touring schedule impacted enormously on the development of modern 
    dance both in Europe and in the United States. Manning (2010,p.11) 
    goes so far as to call her, ‘one of, if not the 
    most influential choreographer of late-20th-century globalization’. 
    There is no single factor that can be said to motivate the diverse 
    range of works in Bausch’s legacy. In the works chosen as case 
    studies for this discussion, the line between humour and tragedy or 
    violence is often very thin,and the dancers transgress the 
    audience’s expectations not only of appropriate comic or dramatic 
    performance, but also of the physical boundaries of the stage 
    itself.
Tanztheater is a highly individualistic 
    format, and the creation of these large-scale works required a 
    level of trust between Bausch as choreographer and her cast. 
    Compared to the workings of a traditional dance company, the 
    relationship between Bausch and the dancers was very intimate, 
    almost familial in nature. In her creative processes, Bausch 
    required a demanding degree of engagement and personal sacrifice 
    from her dancers, delving into their childhood memories and 
    personal histories to compose her works. This was an intricate and 
    deeply personal method, one in which the dancers acted as 
    co-creators of the company’s entire repertoire.
Bausch referred to ordinary, routine occurrences as constant 
    motifs. The conventions of classical ballet are frequently 
    revisited and given the same treatment, signalling a form of 
    artistic protest against classical dance. The ballet class itself 
    falls into the category of the more general ‘everyday’ experience 
    that Bausch distorted; after all, for professional dancers, the 
    ballet class is an indispensable daily ritual. Consider, for 
    instance, the infamous pointe shoe sequence in her 1986 work, 
    Viktor: a dancer enters the stage holding a 
    package of meat, a stool, and a pair of satin pointe shoes. She 
    barks at the audience, ‘das ist Kalbfleisch!’ [‘this is veal!’], 
    before stuffing her shoes with slices of meat. The woman proceeds 
    to dance en pointe for a full seven minutes, her 
    heavy breathing audible even over the deafening classical 
    soundtrack2. A significant marker of the 
    everyday ballet routine—in this case, the pointe shoe—is made 
    ludicrous by the deconstruction of its use. Instead of traditional 
    lambswool padding, here the dancer wraps her feet in bloody veal 
    steaks, an overt allusion to the pain and disfigurement a classical 
    dancer must suffer for the beauty of her art. At the same time, the 
    audience is tacitly involved in the act; addressed directly by the 
    dancer, the spectator is forced to reconsider any preconceived 
    notions regarding the illusionism of classical ballet.
The following case studies — Kontakthof 
    (‘Meeting Place’) (1978) and Nelken 
    (‘Carnations’) (1982)—have been selected in order to show the range 
    of techniques Bausch employs in manipulating the fourth wall. Both 
    are lengthy in duration and are complex, layered works of dance 
    theatre, which demonstrate Bausch’s varied methods of audience 
    manipulation during what I consider the ‘golden period’ of her 
    career, something Kate Elswit (2013, p.217) calls ‘vintage Bausch’. 
    Elswit takes issue with the strong bias exhibited by many critics 
    towards her earlier work, some citing her later pieces as 
    indicative of a ‘mellowing’ technical approach. I contest this, 
    however; by the late 1970s Bausch had established a new and 
    distinctive approach to dance, and the works selected for 
    discussion in this paper are emblematic of the maturation of her 
    genre-defying style.
Case study I: Kontakthof (1978)
The stage design of Kontakthof reflects the 
    style of an oldfashioned dance hall, and a sense of faded grandeur 
    permeates the piece3. The dancers are clad in 
    similarly outdated eveningwear, though this choice of apparel is 
    not unusual for Bausch; throughout her work, Bausch’s dancers are 
    often costumed as if attending a formal event, and she once stated, 
    ‘I never create pieces for leotards’ (quoted in Servos, 2008, 
    p.238). The setting of Kontakthof is slightly 
    melancholic; the stage space is almost like a box containing 
    snapshots of times past, with the cast endlessly playing out the 
    same cycles of childish games and spiteful relationships. The title 
    of the work, which can be translated simply as ‘meeting place,’ 
    could even refer to the negotiation ‘salon’ of a brothel, with a 
    warped intimacy reflected in the performers’ flirtatious 
    interactions with one another; the dancers enact a very public and 
    at times uncomfortable quest for intimate contact. Royd Climenhaga 
    (2009, p.66) argues that the theme of prostitution implied by the 
    title is a metaphor for ‘the prostitution of dancers on the stage’, 
    observing that the title was only chosen halfway through the 
    choreographic development of the work. Hedwig Müller and Norbert 
    Servos (1979, p.69) state that this piece continues the ‘stylistic 
    development’ of Bausch’s method initiated in the 
    Macbeth-Project, although they note that, in 
    this work, ‘the reality of the production of theatre activity is 
    explored more starkly here; it becomes the defining theme of the 
    piece’.
From the very beginning of Kontakthof, the 
    fourth wall is broken down as the dancers consciously display 
    themselves one body part at a time to the audience; they present 
    themselves as if standing in front of an audition panel. According 
    to Climenhaga (2009), Bausch devised the sequence by asking her 
    dancers to present the parts of their bodies they most disliked; 
    hair is scraped back from their faces, and each individual stands 
    facing the audience with teeth bared in an emotionless grimace. It 
    is a particularly unusual opening scene, with the dancers appearing 
    expressionless and listless. Recalling his first experience of 
    watching Kontakthof, Climenhaga (2009, p.69) 
    claimed that the eye contact between dancer and spectator was 
    extremely unsettling: ‘that direct gaze was exposing, and exposure 
    always feels self-consciously personal’. However, the direct 
    relationship between audience and performer is not maintained 
    consistently; Bausch’s dancers alternate between interacting with 
    their audience and retreating into their own self-contained world 
    on stage. At one point, a screen is lowered and the company 
    assemble to watch a short documentary film. Their backs are to the 
    audience, and the spectator is placed in the unusual position of 
    observing the objects of their gaze now in the role of spectators 
    themselves.
