Hands on ... Sony Action Cam
What is it?
A feature-packed sports video camera.
How will it change my life? The internet is awash with amateur 
    video blogs, some of which have become hugely successful and earned 
    their creators upwards of £600,000. If you want a piece of the 
    action and are looking for a suitable device, the Sony HDR-AS100V 
    is an elegant alternative to the boxy GoPro sports camera. It also 
    offers an alternative for cyclists keen to keep a log of their 
    daily commute or simply capture those exhilarating weekend-warrior 
    moments on the bike for posterity.
As with most people who grew up pre-games consoles and X Factor, 
    I spent almost every waking hour outside, football being my pursuit 
    of choice. How times have changed. The Kardashian clan and Big 
    Brother generation have a lot to answer for.
Recently my 11-year-old nephew phoned to tell me he had won 
    first prize in a street dance competition. When I told him how 
    sorry I was to have missed his big moment, he chirpily replied 
    never mind, he had recorded it and said clip was already on his 
    personal YouTube channel. My jaw hit the floor. What happened to 
    the trophy cabinet and photo album?
Good points? The 50Mbps bit-rate recording is very impressive 
    and allows scope for post-editing, which is beyond most other 
    cameras of this range. The video-capture quality is provided by a 
    sensor which provides perfect resolution in conjunction with a 
    top-of-the-range wide-angle Zeiss Tessar lens. The results are 
    spectacular when viewed on an HD television.
Those with a less than steady hand can film without fear of 
    jumpy footage thanks to the SteadyShot image stabilisation 
    software.
WiFi and NFC (Near Field Communication) provide simple and fast 
    ways of sharing your video, while the GPS functionality overlays 
    location information seamlessly to all output.
Bad points? The accessories and mounts available are less 
    developed than those for the GoPro but in terms of functionality 
    the HDR-AS100V holds its own. Another niggle is that the front of 
    the camera and lens have a knack of holding moisture long after the 
    rain has stopped.
Best for … Those looking to add a professional feel to their 
    footage and who have the time to explore all the features, of which 
    there are many.
Avoid if … All you want to do is record your daily bike commute, 
    since there are less convoluted devices which cater for this 
    purpose, including the Sony Action Cam models. If you don't 
    have an HD television then you'll probably want to opt for a 
    non-HD camera instead.
