BT to launch new phone box offering free calls and 
    ultrafast wifi

BT is to roll out a phone box fit for the 21st century offering 
    free calls and ultrafast Wi-Fi.
The ultramodern Link kiosks will open on major high streets 
    across London next year complete with charging points, access to 
    maps and tourist information.
BT said the rollout marked "the next evolution" of its 
    public payphones and would bring digital innovation to the streets 
    of London. 
Hundreds of BT's existing phone boxes will be replaced by 
    the new Links, which will take up less space on the pavement, the 
    telecoms giant said.
However they will be installed in smaller numbers than the 
    payphones they replace, with "at least 750" appearing 
    across central London and other cities over the next few years.
Users within range of a Link will be able to access free 
    ultrafast Wi-Fi with speeds of up to 1Gbps, and the kiosks will 
    offer free UK landline and mobile phone calls, mobile device 
    charging via two USB charging ports and a touch-screen tablet for 
    accessing maps, directions and local services.
The Links will also have sensors to capture real-time data 
    relating to the local environment, such as air and noise pollution, 
    outdoor temperature and traffic conditions, with potential for the 
    information to be fed into smart services.
BT said the service would be funded by revenue from advertising 
    on the Links' digital displays.
Rajesh Agrawal, London's deputy mayor for business, said: 
    "I welcome this exciting new addition to London's 
    streets.
"Expanding London's digital infrastructure is a 
    priority for the Mayor, and LinkUK can play a big part in improving 
    connectivity for Londoners and visitors to our city, while reducing 
    street clutter by upgrading and reducing the number of phone 
    boxes.
"London is already widely regarded as one of the 
    technological capitals of the world but the Mayor is determined to 
    improve connectivity across the city to ensure we maintain that 
    position." 
BT chief executive for wholesale and ventures Gerry McQuade 
    said: "We're evolving the phone box to make it 
    relevant in the 21st century by offering people ultrafast Wi-Fi and 
    a range of digital and information services entirely for 
    free.
"London is one of the greatest cities in the world 
    and it's entirely fitting that it becomes the first UK city to 
    benefit from the Links. But we will be rolling out many more Links 
    to the other great cities across the UK over the coming months as 
    we look to transform the look and functionality of our public 
    payphones."
