Review: Mercedes-Benz GLA 220CDI SE

by Matt Joy
THE GLA is the smallest Mercedes-Benz with any kind of 
    off-road leanings, and arguably it’s also the first proper 
    crossover from the German firm. If you hadn’t guessed already, it’s 
    based on the A-Class hatchback which means it’s compact rather than 
    a giant 4x4.
It shares an obvious visual link with the A-Class too. There’s a 
    prominent Mercedes grille up front and the hatchback rear, but with 
    the addition of body cladding around the sills and a raised ride 
    height.
The GLA sits higher on the road compared to the A-Class by 50mm, 
    while the driving position is fractionally raised too. There are 
    differing looks depending on the specification: the SE version has 
    18-inch wheels with chrome details, while the AMG version adds a 
    discreet bodykit to the mix. It’s a pleasing blend of ruggedness 
    and modernity, and if you like the A-Class’s look, then the GLA is 
    just as appealing.
The GLA is no bigger inside than the A-Class hatchback but the 
    amount of space on offer is still good. Front-seat occupants can 
    relax in comfort with good space all round, while in the back 
    there’s also good space – only taller adults might find legroom a 
    little lacking if the person in front is tall too.
Sitting behind the wheel, you do feel a little higher than 
    standard but not full-on SUV height – giving some useful extra 
    visibility and presence but without turning into a hulking 4x4.
On the road, the GLA feels unsurprisingly similar to the 
    A-Class, except that on SE models in particular the ride quality is 
    significantly better. More compliant suspension may mean a little 
    more body roll in corners but not so that you feel uncomfortable, 
    and most of the time you’ll be happy that bumps are smoothed 
    away.
The engine choice also gives plenty of options for a range of 
    needs. The entry-level petrol motor is turbocharged and 
    surprisingly rapid; a 143mph top speed is plenty but there’s the 
    fire-breathing AMG version above that. On the diesel side, the base 
    200 CDI is thrifty but lacks a little punch, whereas the more 
    powerful 220 CDI has the best blend of performance and economy.
The standard specification is good, with just the SE and AMG 
    Line to choose from. All models have kit like Bluetooth, DAB radio 
    and a handy reversing camera as standard, and prices start at 
    £25,850 for the entry-level 200 CDI. If you want more kit though, 
    you need to be prepared to pay for it, and the ideal-spec 220 CDI 
    model has four-wheel-drive and starts at £30,030.
If you find the standard A-Class a bit youthful, then the GLA 
    has a bit more maturity about it. It’s also a little bit easier to 
    use – that raised height means the ride is more comfortable and 
    it’s easier to get in and out of, which is useful however old you 
    are.
Badge snobs will love it of course, and although it’s not a 
    mighty off-roader it’s sufficiently handy to cope with muddy fields 
    and tricky slopes if that’s your kind of thing.
PRICE £30,030
ENGINE 2-litre, 4cyl, turbodiesel, 168bhp, 
    258 lb ft
PERFORMANCE Top speed 134mph, 0-62mph in 
    8.3s
ECONOMY 55.4mpg combined
CO2 EMISSIONS 134g/km
