Clean, lean Hybrid is very much a Porsche

When scrolling through the statistics for the new 
    Porsche Panamera, a couple stood out.
These aren’t superfast performance figures, as you might expect, 
    but instead for economy and cleanliness.
The Panamera that manages an incredible 91.1mpg and mere 71g/km 
    of carbon dioxide emissions is the new S E-Hybrid model. It comes 
    with a 3.0-litre V6 petrol engine and an electric motor.
This means it can drive for up to 22 miles on battery power 
    alone and at speeds of up to 84mph in near silence with the petrol 
    engine switched off.
Use the full power of both the electric and petrol motors, 
    however, and the S E-Hybrid sees off 0-62mph in a very brisk 5.5 
    seconds and heads on to 167mph.
It may be a clean, lean hybrid, but this Panamera is still very 
    much a Porsche. It feels just like any of the new Panamera range 
    from behind the wheel, too.
There’s plenty of space for the driver and three passengers, as 
    well as boasting a large boot.
On the exterior, there are subtle clues this is the new 
    Panamera, such as reshaped lights and a rear end that’s a little 
    less portly thanks to a repositioned number plate.
The S E-Hybrid is more easily spotted by the Day-Glo paint on 
    its brake calipers and badges. Under the bonnet, as well as hybrid 
    power, there’s a new 3.0-litre V6 petrol engine with twin 
    turbochargers and 420bhp.
This is a very quick car and offers 0-62mph in as little as 
    4.8 seconds, though it will cost from 
    £82,079.
The cheapest Panamera is the 
    3.0-litre V6 Diesel — the best 
    all-rounder. It may not have the outright pace of its siblings, but 
    it’s still a quick car and takes just 
    6.8 seconds to dispatch 0-62mph.
There’s more than ample oomph for overtaking and the V6 diesel 
    is calm and quiet. It also delivers 
    44.8mpg to be more economical than the 
    petrol-only models.
Another benefit is the Diesel costs £62,922. It’s a lot of 
    money, but for a car of this class it’s good value and much cheaper 
    than the Hybrid at £88,967. As well as the cost saving, the Diesel 
    handles with the same aplomb as every Panamera, caressing its way 
    along undulating or pot-holed roads with unruffled ease.
If you’re in a sporty frame of mind, the Panamera lives up to 
    its Porsche badge and hustles along better than any rival.
While the S E-Hybrid has the best on-paper figures, the Diesel 
    has the on-road advantage and feels the most balanced of the new 
    Panameras, which truly makes it stand out.
