Hands on ... Stelle Audio Couture Pillar
What is it?
A stylish portable speaker system.
How will it change my life? Lately, it feels like every second 
    tech-related email I receive concerns audio systems, usually from 
    companies hoping to showcase their latest products to the baffled 
    consumer looking to replace that 1990s relic in the corner that 
    still plays cassette tapes with something a little more 2014.
I've spent a fair bit of time studying the pros and cons of 
    each in a bid to discover the key selling points and the products 
    which best stand out from the crowd. The blunt truth, however, is 
    it's getting harder as innovation on this front has stalled 
    and what we are left with is a market increasingly flooded with 
    similar devices, each sporting only slight cosmetic differences to 
    their ubiquitous space-age, shiny exteriors.
So, when something came along that seemed different, I was 
    intrigued to take a closer look. The Stelle Audio Couture Pillar 
    could very well be the pinnacle of home sound systems. You need to 
    get past the slightly cringeworthy name (yes it's really 
    called that). Stelle is Italian for stars but the company is 
    actually based in California and boasts a philosophy centred on 
    making technology look fashionable.
The Stelle Audio Couture Pillar does not stray from this ethos. 
    It's best described as looking like a power cell in a sci-fi 
    film. It has two 1.5-inch acoustic drivers at the top and a 
    three-inch subwoofer at the bottom, which help to disperse sound in 
    as even and elegant way as possible.
In addition to seamless Bluetooth music transfer, the Stelle 
    Audio Couture Pillar comes equipped with a 3.5mm jack cable to 
    connect all those legacy devices, and a USB port to charge further 
    gadgets. It provides speakerphone functionality to take hands-free 
    phone calls.
The unit is portable so you can leave the power cable at home 
    for up to 15 hours of continuous play. The sound quality is 
    fantastic and easily the best of any wireless speakers I've 
    ever heard.
Good points? Handsome looks, slimline figure, sounds fantastic 
    and hails from California - all hallmarks of a star. The Stelle 
    Audio Couture Pillar raises the acoustic system bar with its 
    battery life, which will outlast most mp3 players to which 
    it's connected.
Bad points? Although I can find no fault with the speaker, my 
    one gripe is with the eye-watering price tag. It will be above and 
    beyond what many can and would be willing to pay.
Best for … Uncluttered rooms with high ceilings to get the best 
    out of its superior sound.
Avoid if … You are looking to upgrade your party speaker as the 
    unit is not incredibly powerful and could feel a bit flat to ears 
    at the back of the room.
