Review: Volvo V60 Polestar

by Richard Webber
It’s two decades since Volvo startled touring car fans 
    by chancing two 850 estates in the British Touring Car 
    Championship, and fast Swedish wagons have elicited a quiet 
    reverence ever since – possibly aided by their tendency to wear 
    blue lights.
But while the recently departed V60 T6 was no slouch at 0-60mph 
    in 6.0 seconds, German rivals have long 
    been breaking the five-second barrier with ever more powerful 
    load-luggers to turn the family dog’s stomach.
Bad news from the north for Rex, then, as Polestar – reigning 
    Swedish touring car champ and Volvo’s official tuning partner – has 
    just launched this, a 345bhp version of the V60 that hits 60mph in 
    4.8 seconds. Based on the T6 R-Design, 
    it boasts upgrades at almost every turn.
Generously padded leather and nubuck seats are comfy and 
    enveloping, while the big-diameter steering wheel is similarly 
    trimmed; both add purpose and luxury to the already premium-feeling 
    interior. Whether the transparent gear knob topper and carbon 
    fibre-clad centre stack help or hinder is more debatable.
Bodywork upgrades are subtle but effective. There are new 
    splitters up front, while a diffuser and roof spoiler contribute 
    downforce, but you’d need to be doing the car’s set maximum of 
    155mph for the effect to match that of having a German Shepherd 
    (dog) tethered in the boot; better to accept that subtle aggression 
    is their primary remit. Slightly more functional are the big 20in 
    alloys that wear some fairly serious Michelin Pilot Super Sports 
    and a stainless steel performance exhaust complete with 
    muffler-nullifying valves to let the engine clear its throat with 
    significantly more gusto on start-up, when spilling over 4000rpm 
    and when the gearbox is in Sport mode.
The engine itself – a 3.0-litre 
    in-line six-pot – gets a big twin-scroll turbo and new intercooler, 
    helping add around 15 per cent more power and torque. It feeds an 
    old-school six-speed automatic gearbox that’s been refettled by 
    Polestar for quicker shifts, equipped with steering wheel-mounted 
    paddles and linked to an altogether more modern Haldex 
    four-wheel-drive system. Drive is normally front-biased, but swift 
    acceleration, quick cornering or dialling down the traction control 
    sends up to 50 per cent of torque to the rear wheels. Hefty Brembo 
    brakes are able to rein things in, too.
Now, launch control may seem about as relevant to a Volvo as 
    hydrogen peroxide is to the average Swede, but Polestar has 
    invested its V60 with start-line trickery in a typically Volvo-like 
    way. Relent the traction control, knock the shifter into Sport, and 
    plant a foot firmly on each pedal. Step off the brake and the tacho 
    needle becomes a windscreen wiper, swiping violently as the 
    Polestar chews through the gears, punctuated by fleeting upshifts. 
    After just 16.7 seconds you’re doing 
    120mph. Meanwhile, anyone caught in the car’s wake is hosed down 
    with a blaring dose of twin-piped turbulence.
Yet there’s little drama in the cockpit. There’s whooshing from 
    the turbo and the engine gets louder near the 6,500rpm red line, 
    but it’s never coarse, and there are no chirps from the tyres, no 
    tugging through the wheel, and mere indifference to surface 
    undulations.
And this is the V60 Polestar’s theme. Fast? Certainly. Composed? 
    Impressively. Engaging? Not so much. Tackle a twisty road and the 
    chassis – enriched with stiff springs, reinforced anti-roll bars, 
    extra bracing and race-bred Ohlins dampers – keeps the 1,834kg 
    estate’s bulk in check at great speeds with the help of that Haldex 
    drive distribution, while the steering is quick-witted and precise. 
    But you won’t feel much of the road through the wheel, nor the 
    toiling of the tyres through your backside, nor the efforts of the 
    Brembos through your foot.
But this is still a family car, not a track-day warrior. And 
    apart from an over-eagerness to downshift and some low-rev droning, 
    the V60 Polestar makes a surprisingly comfy urban companion and a 
    relaxed dog-day wafter. Fuel economy is middling, but no worse than 
    the regular T6’s.
It’s kit-rich, too, equipped with literally every item on the 
    V60 options list – you need only choose a colour. At nearly fifty 
    grand, its several thousand pricier than the similarly powered and 
    paced (and more economical, if harder-riding) Audi S4 Avant, but 
    with just 125 V60 Polestars currently slated for the UK, Volvo’s 
    hottest-ever wagon has exclusivity on its side, too.
PRICE £49,775
ENGINE 3l 6cyl turbocharged petrol with 
    345bhp
PERFORMANCE Max speed 155mph (limited); 
    0-60mph 4.8secs
ECONOMY 27.7mpg 
    (combined)
CO2 EMISSIONS 237g/km
