Review: McLaren 650S

McLAREN’S 650S is essentially an evolution of the 12C, 
    but with such a comprehensive spectrum of upgrades that it’s more 
    like a brand new car. It’s faster, better balanced and has an even 
    broader range of talents at both ends of the performance/comfort 
    scale.
Its mighty turbocharged V8 engine has the sort of power you only 
    used to get in unobtanium-rare hypercars, and the fact that the 
    650S is half a second faster to 100mph than the legendary McLaren 
    F1 tells its own story. This thing is crushingly, breathlessly 
    fast.
McLaren’s engineers and test drivers are keen to point out that 
    styling is a mere trifle of a concern that comes after making sure 
    the mechanicals are the best in the business. That said, a new 
    front end adds significant downforce to keep those sticky-tyred 
    front wheels pinned hard to the floor.
The image is in the same vein as Porsche’s, in that McLaren is 
    rightly seen as a technological powerhouse, whose cars’ engineering 
    prowess is the equivalent of a huge handlebar moustache and an 
    improbably large chest. Ye olde concepts of masculinity blend with 
    an appreciation for 21st-century tech that works, and works 
    astonishingly well.
While you probably won’t want to throw away the estate car just 
    yet, the 650S Spider has a pleasantly cavernous front boot and, if 
    you’re willing to leave the roof up, a smaller extra boot between 
    the seats and the engine. There’s plenty of space for weekend trips 
    away. As a rule, McLarens are among the most used supercars of them 
    all.
Full throttle feels like being squeezed under a very large boot. 
    Your lungs struggle against the g-force as 650 apparently very 
    angry horses shove you back into your seat after the slightest of 
    delays waiting for the two huge turbochargers to kick in.
Those turbos are a massive part of the appeal, whooshing and 
    whistling and chuff-chuffing away like a glorious old steam train. 
    Lack of character is not an accusation you can level at this 
    car.
Despite the pace and the stunning stability and usability of the 
    chassis, which imbibes the car with a bizarre agility that absorbs 
    everything you can give it and consistently rewards you for your 
    efforts, the 650S also makes a shockingly comfortable everyday 
    biffabout. It’s all the supercar you could ever need.
This convertible version is a good £20,000 more expensive than 
    the coupe and, since the one-piece carbon chassis requires no 
    re-engineering for the purpose, those 20 big ones are pure profit 
    for its maker. Still, feedback from McLaren is that many (evidently 
    Midas-rich) buyers think that, for the engineering and capability 
    on offer, the 650S is actually underpriced…
Who would buy one? Anyone with lots of spare cash who 
    appreciates technical and driving prowess ahead of outright badge 
    heritage. It’s a mighty, mighty sports car and appeals more to 
    those that want to drive it as the makers intended, rather than 
    posers.
PRICE £215,250
ENGINE 
    3.8-litre, twin-turbo 8cyl, 641bhp, 500 
    lb/ft
PERFORMANCE Top speed 204mph, 0-62mph in 
    3.0 s
ECONOMY 
    24.2mpg
CO2 EMISSIONS 275g/km
