Mars-bound humanoid robot built by Edinburgh scientists 
    and Nasa 

University of Edinburgh PhD students and researchers working on 
    NASA's Valkyrie robot in the University of Edinburgh's 
    School of Informatics. Picture: PA 
A HUMAN-LIKE robot that walks upright and can hold 
    objects in its hands is being developed by Scottish scientists to 
    boldly go where no man has gone before – on missions to 
    Mars.
It is hoped the Nasa android, the only one of its type in Europe 
    and one of only three prototypes in the world, will make the 
    journey to the red planet years ahead of the first human astronauts 
    in order to lay crucial groundwork for their arrival.
Reminiscent of a Star Wars stormtrooper, the 1.8m-tall bionic 
    being has been named Valkyrie after the warrior maidens of Norse 
    mythology. 
The automaton has been designed with a humanoid shape so it can 
    work alongside real people or step in to carry out high-­risk tasks 
    in their place.
Currently, Valkyrie can walk on two legs and perform basic 
    movements such as holding and manipulating objects.
In a collaboration with Nasa, researchers at the University of 
    Edinburgh will work to give it a more sophisticated set of skills, 
    enabling it to better understand and respond to its 
    surroundings.
They also aim to improve the robot’s handling and walking 
    capabilities by employing sophisticated on­board sensors to help it 
    make sense of its environment and improve manoeuvrability.
The robot’s ability to interact closely and safely with humans 
    and other machines will also be developed.
“Valkyrie is a huge scientific undertaking,” said Professor 
    Sethu Vijayakumar, of the University of Edinburgh’s School of 
    Informatics and director of the Edinburgh Centre for Robotics.
“We are looking forward to tackling the many technical 
    challenges involved in developing a large-­scale humanoid robot, 
    and pushing the state of the art in humanoid robotics.”
The first humans are not scheduled to blast off for the fourth 
    planet from the sun until at least 2024.
However, several missions are planned over the next few years to 
    pave the way for the next giant leap for mankind.

