Rise of the robots is bringing huge benefits to 
    farming
 
FARMING is embracing a technological revolution that involves 
    the likes of computers, global positioning systems (GPS), unmanned 
    drones, driverless tractors, and robots and much more.
The industry is on the brink of enjoying major developments in 
    robots that could take the hard work and drudgery out of harvesting 
    fruit and vegetables by hand.
There are two critical factors that separate a robot from a 
    machine - the capacity to be autonomous or to act with some degree 
    of decision, and presence of actuators, which allow a machine to 
    alter its environments. This precludes computers and fridges from 
    being called robots.
Researchers are using their knowledge of soft robotics to create 
    deformable manipulators, or "hands", that can manipulate 
    "fragile" produce, such as broccoli, strawberries and 
    mushrooms. Currently, UK researchers are working on a harvesting 
    robot that can handle and cut iceberg lettuces with the same 
    handling care as human harvesters. 
The technology has the potential to be deployed at any time of 
    day and impact positively on the productivity and life quality of 
    agricultural workers.
Researchers now envisage robots that could perform multiple 
    tasks. For example, inter-changeable tools would allow switching 
    between tasks such as seeding, tillage, spraying and harvesting.
You could also have robots for agriculture and food production 
    that would perform other useful tasks at the same time such as 
    surveillance, keeping a watchful eye on crops, livestock and 
    expensive farm machinery, while carrying out their primary duties 
    on the farm or in the factory.
Satellite imaging is used a lot in agriculture nowadays. A 
    drawback with that technology is that the images aren't as 
    good when there is cloud cover, but low-flying drones can 
    consistently produce high resolution pictures of crops and their 
    condition.
Different sensors - visible light, infra-red and thermal - are 
    being used to identify different features of crops.Researchers have 
    created a database that, for example, recognise weed types, the 
    presence of disease, plant stress levels, crop damage, and crop 
    yield potential.
Identifying weeds, their density and precise location within a 
    field could, with a GPS-programmed sprayer, result in localised 
    spraying and a big saving in chemical costs. Similarly, by 
    identifying chlorophyll content in the crop plants the technique 
    could be used for variable rate nitrogen fertiliser application.
"EyeSpot", a research project part-funded by AHDB 
    Horticulture, is driving innovation in weed control and aims to 
    reduce herbicide inputs for field vegetables by up to 95 per 
    cent.
A team of experts at University of Reading are developing the 
    use of a cutting-edge automated spot herbicide ejector, which will 
    "point and shoot" metered droplets to individual leaves 
    of unwanted plants in row crops.
The ejector will use an innovative imaging system to distinguish 
    weeds in field vegetable crops and will evaluate the dose of 
    droplets required to kill weeds at different growth stages. 
    Herbicide droplets will then be accurately targeted to the leaves 
    of the unwanted plants. The concept is "no herbicide 
    applied to the crop; none to the soil; only to the 
    weeds".
The project has been developed in response to concerns about the 
    loss of herbicides through legislation and pressure to target 
    pesticides better and in lower doses. The technology will precisely 
    apply herbicide only to the weeds in such a way as to eliminate 
    drift and splatter, while minimising the likelihood of run-off to 
    soil and non-target organisms, including the crop. By applying 
    droplets of a systemic, non-selective herbicide to individual 
    leaves, it represents a paradigm shift in weed technology, 
    achieving selective weed control by engineering rather than 
    chemistry.
An automated vision-guided droplet application system should be 
    ready for preliminary trials in 2018.
Livestock farmers are also using advanced technologies and 
    robots. More and more dairy cows are being milked by stationary 
    "robots". After some initial training, cows learn to 
    stand over the robotic milking machine. They are encouraged to do 
    so by the prospect of having their udders relieved of milk as well 
    as a measured portion of tasty, concentrated feed being offered to 
    them from an automated dispenser.
Once in place, the robot uses electronic sensors to locate the 
    cow's teats, attach the cluster and then milk the cow. 
    Meanwhile, a computer recognises the cow by means of an electronic 
    transponder fixed to her neck, records the amount of milk she gives 
    and dispenses an amount of feed appropriate to her yield. It also 
    knows not to feed a greedy cow that has come forward too often.
