Ford Mustang GT Convertible is a topless stunner

‘Cool car.” It’s 
    not often I hear that, even when this job allows me to drive some 
    fairly exotic fare, but for a week recently I heard it everywhere I 
    went. Everyone from primary school kids to 20-something mountain 
    bikers and middle-aged women in Honda Jazzes smiled, waved or gave 
    a thumbs up. It seems that everyone loves a big ol’ muscle 
    car.
Even if I wasn’t such a shameless show-off, there was certainly 
    no chance of slipping by unnoticed. The Mustang in general is not a 
    subtle car but this one in particular stood out. Bright Competition 
    Orange paintwork, a folding roof and a 5.0-litre V8 meant that 
    everywhere I went people stopped and stared.

And rightly so as it’s a striking machine, modern but with 
    plenty of little cues calling back to the classic early Mustang. 
    Externally, the whole car echoes the early models, from its long, 
    broad bonnet and trapezoidal grille along the high-waisted, 
    low-roofed profile back to the vertically arranged ‘tri-bar’ triple 
    tail-lights. Inside, two huge aluminium-clad circles house the 
    speedo and rev counter, aping those of the original along with the 
    aviation-style rocker switches.
The interior clearly shares some switchgear with other Fords but 
    there are enough model-specific elements – including the 
    console-dominating climate controls – that it still feels a step 
    removed from a Focus or Mondeo. It’s well put together and of 
    generally good quality but it’s not going to give the folks at Audi 
    or Mercedes any sleepless nights.
For years the overriding criticism of American muscle cars was 
    that they were fine until you tried to stop or go round a corner. 
    Ford insist this Mustang is different. With double ball-joint 
    MacPherson struts up front and an all-new integral-link independent 
    rear suspension system, plus uprated brakes, Ford says this is a 
    car tuned to suit to European roads.
Dynamically, it’s a bit deceptive. It is a big car – it’s 4.7m 
    long and feels every millimetre of its 2m width. It’s also heavy, 
    tipping the scales at 1,792kg. Whenever you drive it you are aware 
    of that size and weight yet it hustles along nicely, gradually 
    building your confidence in its abilities.
There’s a little bit of roll you probably won’t find in European 
    rivals but there’s also plenty of grip and it responds to steering 
    inputs far quicker than its bulk would lead you to expect. It’ll 
    never be the best choice for some of our tightest and twistiest B 
    roads but show it a winding, well-sighted stretch of rural A road 
    and the Mustang settles into a sweet, smooth flowing rhythm, 
    soaking up bumps well and blasting between corners in a wall of V8 
    woofle.
Ah yes, that V8. After the European launch, my colleague, 
    Steven, said he’d chose the 2.3-litre EcoBoost model. He’s mad. 
    Yes, it’s cheaper to buy and run but if you’re going to have an 
    attention-grabbing American muscle car then you might as well have 
    it with the additional drama of that unmistakable V8 growl.
It’s a fantastic noise. Especially from cold, it’s full of 
    menace and as the revs climb you’re surrounding by a deep bass 
    growl. My only complaint is that our car’s auto 
    ’box kept wanting to shift up 
    while I wanted to ponce around town in second gear making a 
    racket.
And there’s more than just noise from the engine. A healthy 
    415bhp and 391lb/ft of torque get the big beasty up to 60mph in 5 
    seconds and will push it on to 155mph. The surge as it accelerates 
    is heady and allied to the old-school roar as the revs rise it’s an 
    absolute blast. Not such a blast is the 17mpg average I saw over a 
    week.
To get the most out of that power and the new chassis and 
    suspension there are a choice of driving modes – Normal, Sport+, 
    Track and Wet/Snow. To be honest, once you’ve tried Sport+ you’ll 
    find Normal a bit too, well, normal. I tried several times to use 
    it for a whole drive but the lure of better throttle response, 
    sharper steering and faster gearshifts was too much to resist.
Track, however, is definitely best left for the track. Even with 
    traction control fully on the V8 is capable of loosening the rear 
    tyres with just a little provocation so switching it off on the 
    public highway is probably not advisable.
If you can resist the urge to behave like a yobbo then the 
    Mustang makes a great long-distance cruiser as well as back-road 
    blaster.
With the roof up it’s quiet and Normal drive mode and comfort 
    steering settings make for effortless wafting. The big supportive 
    leather seats (heated and cooled) are supremely comfortable and, as 
    long as there’s just two of you, there’s loads of space. The rear 
    seats are a token gesture but leg and shoulder room up front is 
    excellent and the boot is a generous 332 litres, more than enough 
    for a couple of weekend bags.
Our car’s optional Shaker stereo system added enough Watts to 
    drown out the engine, if you so wish, but also featured satnav, 
    those climate-controlled seats and rear parking sensors. Every 
    Mustang gets leather upholstery, dual-zone climate control, auto 
    lights and wipers, and Ford’s strong Sync 2 media system. Plus 
    there are track apps featuring line lock, launch control and an 
    acceleration timer,
One of the big talking points of the Mustang is that you can 
    pick up a V8 model for as little as £35,000, a fraction of what 
    you’d pay for a similarly-powered coupe from most rival 
    manufacturers. This specced-up convertible model is a chunk more – 
    at £41,580 – but still undercuts comparable offerings by some 
    margin. You can have a BMW M4 for the same price but it’s a weedy 
    252bhp 4-cylinder unit. For a straight-six M4 you’re talking 
    £63,000. A V8 Mercedes C63 coupe is £60,000+. Similarly a Lexus RCF 
    with its 470bhp 5.0 V8 will set you back £60,000, and you can’t 
    have a drop-top. Even a 330bhp 3.0-litre Audi S5 weighs in at 
    £47,000.
Okay, so the Mustang won’t match any of these 
    in term in terms of flash interior 
    or ultimate driving dynamism but as nice as the BMW’s interior 
    might be I’m not sure it’s £20k nicer. And, unless you’re on track, 
    I’m not sure how often you’ll be able to take advantage of its 
    superior high-speed performance – the Ford is certainly no 
    slouch.
I suspect most Mustang buyers won’t care too much about such 
    things anyway. If you want a hunk of American-made V8 muscle and 
    the 50 years of heritage that the galloping horse badge carries 
    with it then a ruthlessly effective Germanic ’bahn-
    stormer isn’t likely to 
    float your boat.
Besides which, how many people do you think will ask for a 
    selfie with your regulation black M4?
Fast facts
Price. £41,580
Engine: 5.0-litre V8 petrol producing 
    415bhp, 391lb/ft
Transmission: Six-speed automatic driving 
    the rear wheels
Performance: Top speed 155mph, 0-62mph in 5 
    seconds (approx)
Economy: 22.1mpg
Emissions: 289g/km of CO2
