Toy robot is child’s play for crowdfunding Scots inventor 
    
 Alexander Enoch, founder of Robotical, 
    with his robot, Marty. Picture: Neil Hanna/TSPL
A Scots inventor will launch a crowdfunding campaign 
    next week to kick-start production on a toy robot which could 
    radically alter how children learn about mechanics and computer 
    programming.
Dr Alexander Enoch is the creator of Marty - a fun-size machine 
    with distinctive eyebrows that can walk, dance and even play 
    football. 

It has been hailed as one of the UK’s most exciting 
    technological spin-outs, thanks in part to its innovative 
    design.
Each machine is made from 3D printable parts, and can be 
    controlled by a smartphone.
The 30-year-old from Edinburgh has already won the backing of 
    the Royal Academy of Engineering, which helped him found his own 
    company, Robotical.
“Robotical can help children learn coding skills, 
    mechanics and give them hands on engineering skills,” Dr 
    Enoch said.
“The robot will help more kids get into STEM (science, 
    technology, engineering and mechanical) subjects and give them the 
    chance to get hands on with robotics.”Marty, the 
    eye-catching robot that Dr Enoch has produced, was inspired by 
    research at the University of Edinburgh - and a young 
    relative. 
“I was working with quite big, cumbersome walking robots 
    for my PhD at Edinburgh,” he said. “Marty was partly 
    in a response to that. I wanted to make a much more simple walking 
    robot that’s fun to work with.
“I was also looking for a robot toy for my niece, Juliet, 
    and I couldn’t find one that I liked as a robotics engineer - so I 
    set out to make one.
“Robots that can walk – and are expressive – are a lot 
    better at engaging younger children. There’s not a huge number out 
    there.
“There are some smart toys – which are basically 
    remote-controlled cars with legs – and anything beyond that costs 
    hundreds of pounds which is really geared towards adult 
    hobbyists.
“Marty is much more simple. Anyone can get him 
    working.”
Dr Enoch, known as Sandy to friends, developed an innovative 
    mechanism which moves the robot’s legs and helps keeps costs down 
    by using less components.
“I guess the other part that makes Marty unique is his 
    eyebrows - but that’s more a stylistic thing,” he added.
The word robot was first used in 1921 by the Czech writer Karel 
    Čapek in his science-fiction play, Rossum’s Universal Robots, and 
    quickly entered common usage.
Since then, automatons have been the subject of countless books 
    and films - but constructing a real example capable of even basic 
    tasks remains a challenging and time-consuming process.
While Marty is designed to capture the attention of young minds, 
    he has a very serious purpose.
“These toys have a great opportunity to be 
    educational,” he said. “Robotics is a place where 
    programming, electronics and mechanics all converge. It’s a great 
    way to learn about any of those subjects.
“Robotics is a growing field. The world is going to need 
    a lot more robotics engineers – and engineers in general – over the 
    next few years. So anything we can do to encourage people to take 
    an interest in it has to be a good thing.”
Following feedback at the recent Engage Invest Exploit (EIE) 
    investor showcase in Edinburgh, Dr Enoch will launch a crowdfunder 
    to pay for the initial production run of his robot.
A total of 1,000 Martys will be made and sold directly via the 
    Robotical website. If the sale goes well, he hopes major retailers 
    will soon step in with orders.
“We need to raise at least £50,000 - if we reach that, 
    the mass-production becomes viable,” he said.
“My preference is to keep the manufacturing in Scotland. 
    For one thing, you can monitor production quality much more 
    closely.”
The inventor is currently Robotical’s only full-time employee, 
    but is assisted by two others he hopes will soon be able to join 
    the firm on a permanent basis.
Winning a fellowship from the Royal Academy of Engineering also 
    proved to a timely boost to the fledgling firm.
“They’ve helped me make pitches more precisely without 
    getting too bogged down in the details,” he said. Once 
    Marty the robot does go on sale, Dr Enoch will listen to feedback 
    with interest - especially from his seven-year-old niece.
“She’s wanted one for a while,” he said. 
    “She finds him very cute.” 
