Seven of the most famous ships built on the River Clyde 
    
 The Cutty Sark in her custom-built dry dock in 
    Greenwich. The ship was built in Dumbarton in 1869 and last sailed 
    in 1938. Picture: Wikipedia 
MORE than 25,000 naval, merchant and passenger ships 
    have been built on the Clyde and its tributaries since the Scott 
    family first set up a yard in Greenock in 1711. ‘Clydebuilt’ became 
    shorthand worldwide for precision marine engineering, with some of 
    the famous vessels of the 19th and 20th centuries built on the 
    river.
Comet
  RMS Lucania, launched at Govan in 
    1893, held the title of fastest passenger liner afloat for five 
    years. Picture: Wikicommons 
It may have only been 45ft long, but the Comet represented a 
    giant leap forward in shipbuilding technology when launched at Port 
    Glasgow in 1812. The vessel provided the first commercially 
    successful steamboat ferry service in Europe and hinted the era of 
    sailing ships may be coming to an end. The Comet was built for 
    Henry Bell, a Scottish engineer fascinated by the potential of 
    steam power. When his wife became manager of a public baths and 
    hotel in Helensburgh, Bell saw an opportunity to attract customers 
    to the seaside town with a state-of-the-art ferry. The Comet was 
    outclassed by other steamers within four years but had by then 
    secured her footnote in maritime history. A replica of the boat now 
    stands in Port Glasgow town centre. 
Cutty Sark
 It would take another 50 years before steam overtook wind as 
    the power source of the biggest ships. The Cutty Sark was one of 
    the last of its kind when launched in 1869 at the Scott & 
    Linton yard in Dumbarton. Known as a clipper - a mid-19th century 
    type of sailing ship built for speed - such vessels were 
    characterised by a narrow hull and large total sail area. Cutty 
    Sark was ordered by the shipping magnate John Willis and named 
    after a character in Robert Burns’ classic poem Tam o’Shanter. 
    Although famously associated with the Chinese tea trade, Cutty Sark 
    spent most of her life at sea transporting wool from Australia. She 
    last sailed in 1938 and became a cadet training ship. In 1954 the 
    Cutty Sark was towed to a custom-built dry dock in Greenwich, south 
    London, where she has remained ever since. The ship is a prominent 
    landmark on the route of the annual London Marathon. 
RMS Lucania
  HMS Hood was built at the John Brown 
    yard in Clydebank and launched in 1918. She was sunk in 1941 with 
    the loss of 1415 crew. Picture: Wikimedia
In an era before air travel there was huge public interest in 
    ships capable of reaching far-flung destinations at increasing 
    speeds. The most prestigious route in British maritime trade was 
    the Atlantic crossing to the US. Shipping companies promoted 
    themselves on the speed and ease in which they could reach New 
    York. The fastest passenger liner was awarded the Blue Riband, an 
    unofficial accolade borrowed from horse racing. RMS Lucania, built 
    at the Fairfields yard in Govan and launched in 1893, won the title 
    on just her second ever voyage. At the time, Lucania and her sister 
    ship Campania had the largest triple expansion engines ever fitted 
    to Cunard liners. 
HMS Hood
Built at John Brown’s yard in Clydebank and launched in 1918, 
    HMS Hood was the pride of the Royal Navy and the most famous 
    battleship in Britian upon the outbreak of war in 1939. Known as 
    ‘The Mighty Hood’, the battlecruiser was employed to protect 
    convoys in the North Sea and as a general deterrent against 
    invasion. In 1941 the Hood was ordered to intercept the Bismarck - 
    the largest battleship ever built by the German navy - and prevent 
    her reaching the Atlantic where she would pose a threat to Allied 
    shipping. On May 24 the Hood and HMS Prince of Wales spotted the 
    Bismarck and opened fire. Less than 10 minutes later, a German 
    shell struck the Hood and exploded her main ammunition magazine. 
    The battleship sank within three minutes with the loss of all but 
    three of her 1418 crew. It remains one of the blackest days in 
    Royal Navy history and was a huge blow to British morale. The 
    Bismarck was sunk two weeks later after being tracked by HMS Ark 
    Royal. The wreck of the Hood was finally located in 2001 and one of 
    her two ship’s bells was retrieved in 2015. It is planned to 
    display the bell at a permanent memorial to the Hood and her crew. 
    
RMS Queen Mary
  RMS Queen Mary was built in Clydebank 
    and is now permanently docked at Long Beach, California. Picture: 
    Wikicommons
The Queen Mary, along with her sister ship Queen Elizabeth, were 
    built for Cunard’s weekly express service between Southampton, 
    Cherbourg, and New York. It was the dying days of the superliner 
    era which would soon be ended by the growing popularity of 
    transatlantic flights. Built at John Brown’s Clydebank yard and 
    launched in 1934, the Queen Mary won the Blue Ribband in August 
    1936 for the fastest Atlantic crossing. She regained it in 1938 and 
    would hold the title until 1952. The ship was named after Queen 
    Mary, consort of King George V, and remained popular with 
    passengers and the wider public into the 1960s. She was retired in 
    1967 and sailed to Long Beach, California, where she is now 
    permanently moored as a floating hotel. 
Queen Elizabeth 2
Ocean liners were no longer built solely with transport in mind 
    by the time of the Queen Mary’s retiral. Instead they were marketed 
    as holiday destinations in their own right. The age of luxury 
    cruises arrived at just the right time for the Queen Elizabeth 2 - 
    or the QE2 as she quickly became known. She was the last superliner 
    to be built at John Brown’s yard in Clydebank and many Scots can 
    still recall her launch in September 1967. The interior and 
    superstructure of the ship was designed by James Gardner - 
    described by the Council of Industrial Design as that of a “very 
    big yacht”. The QE2 would serve as the Cunard line’s flagship from 
    1969 until the launch of the French-built Queen Mary 2 in 2004. 
    Although she spent much of her life as a crusie ship, the QE2 did 
    undertake scheduled sailings from Southhampton to New York each 
    year - a tradition continued by the Queen Mary 2. The liner was 
    retired in 2008 and sold to an investment consortium. The QE2 is 
    currently laid up at Port Rashid in the UAE, where her future 
    remains unclear. 
HMS Daring
  HMS Daring docked in Leith in 2009. 
    The ship was the first of the new Type 45 destroyers to be 
    launched. Picture: Greg Macvean
Shipbuilding on the Clyde is today concentrated on three 
    remaining yards and is dominated by Royal Navy orders. Defence 
    giant BAE Systems operates sites at Govan and Scotstoun while a 
    smaller commercial yard at Port Glasgow remains in private hands. 
    The most prestigious shipbuilding programme on the river in recent 
    years was the construction of six Type 45 destroyers. The first to 
    be launched in 2006 was HMS Daring, the seventh naval ship to be 
    given the name. Following the Falklands War, the Type 45s were 
    primarily designed for anti-air warfare and are characterised by 
    their distinctive radar towers. It has been suggested Daring’s 
    radar is capable of tracking 1,000 objects the size of a cricket 
    ball travelling at three times the speed of sound. 
