Google launches Android mobile payment system in UK 
    
 A Google employee gives a demonstration 
    of Android Pay on a phone. Picture: AP/Jeff Chiu
GOOGLE’S Android Pay mobile payment system has 
    launched in the UK, enabling users to make purchases using a 
    smartphone.
The “tap and go” system lets users of Android smartphones - 
    including those made by HTC, Samsung, Sony and Huawei - store a 
    digital version of their debit or credit card on their device.
They pay for items by tapping it against a contactless card 
    point, including in high street stores and on the London transport 
    system.
The system rivals Apple Pay, which was launched by the iPhone 
    maker in the UK in July last year. 
Most of the major UK banks have signed up for the Android system 
    from launch day, so holders of an eligible Visa or MasterCard at 
    Bank of Scotland, First Direct, Halifax, HSBC, Lloyds Bank, M&S 
    Bank, MBNA and Nationwide Building Society can now use Android Pay. 
    Google has confirmed more banks will be added in the future.
An Android Pay app has been launched to help users set up and 
    manage their transactions. The payment system can also be used 
    within certain apps as a form of payment, including Ticketmaster, 
    Uber and Domino’s Pizza.
Android Pay enables users to make transactions of up to £30 
    without unlocking their phone, while payments of more than £30 can 
    be completed by confirming using a fingerprint or pin entry.
All transactions are encrypted for additional security, with 
    specially generated digital tokens used instead of real card 
    details when a purchase is made, to protect personal 
    information.
Pali Bhat, Google’s senior director of product management, said: 
    “Security is at the centre of Android Pay. With industry standard 
    tokenisation, Android Pay doesn’t send merchants your real card 
    number when you purchase. 
“Android Pay also makes it convenient to keep track of payments 
    and to lock your device if it becomes lost or stolen.”
The system will work on any Android smartphone with near-field 
    communication (NFC) technology built in and at least version 4.4 of 
    the Android operating system. This means most Android devices 
    released in the last two years are compatible. 
