Hands on ... Lytro light field camera
This gadget is a camera, albeit one that has little in 
    common with the vast majority of digital cameras.
The Lytro is the brainchild of Ren Ng, a Stanford University 
    graduate whose research into light field photography won the 
    academic institution's prize for best thesis in computer 
    science.
The key selling point of the Lytro is that images can be focused 
    after the fact. Unlike a conventional camera where moving optics 
    focus incoming light against a flat plane, the Lytro camera sensor 
    records the colour, intensity and direction of individual light 
    rays, allowing the photographs to be reconstructed and refocused 
    after they are captured.
The camera sports a large, sharp lens with 8x optical zoom. Zoom 
    level is controlled by a touch sensitive slider on top of the 
    camera which is, in all honesty, a bit of a pain to use. The 
    touch-sensitive area is defined only by a subtle line of raised 
    dots, and it takes several swipes across the camera to go from the 
    widest to tightest zoom settings.
Even at the widest setting the Lytro isn't a match for most 
    smartphone cameras, making it difficult to capture landscapes or 
    even whole buildings in a single shot. In side-by-side testing with 
    an iPhone, I found the Lytro would capture around one-quarter of 
    the overall scene captured by the phone camera.
Most cameras can be measured in terms of their megapixel (MP) 
    count - the number of individual points of light that the camera 
    records, measured in millions. A typical modern compact camera will 
    record 8-12MP.
By contrast, the unique way the Lytro records pictures requires 
    a different measure - megarays. The Lytro sports a seemingly 
    impressive 11-megaray sensor, but this produces photographs that 
    are equivalent to just 1.2MP in old money, which is only big enough 
    to produce a sharp 4in print.
Not only are the images of a similar size and resolution to a 
    late 1990s digital camera, but the colour accuracy and sharpness 
    are reminiscent of that era too; images can have a strong blue or 
    orange cast, often look flat and suffer from excess noise or grain 
    in anything less than bright daylight.
The Lytro camera is a great science project and Ren Ng was a 
    worthy award winner at Stanford, but that doesn't necessarily 
    make the Lytro a great product. At £400 there are many faster, 
    sharper, lighter and simpler cameras on the market, leaving the 
    Lytro in a very narrow niche - a camera that does something clever 
    that nobody needs.
