Robots top list of Christmas 2015 must-haves 

IT is the technological generation for whom touch 
    screens are second nature and even teddy bears come with artificial 
    intelligence.
And now it appears that gadget-based toys will be top of letters 
    to Santa this year as retailer Hamleys unveiled is top predictions 
    for this year’s Christmas must-haves.
The recent move back towards old-fashioned wooden toys appears 
    to be firmly relegated to the past, replaced by a robot featuring 
    speech-to-text technology and a cuddly “My Friend Freddy” bear who 
    “really knows you” the moment he is connected to a smart device.
Hamleys, whose buyers have predicted the 10 top sellers this 
    Christmas from the thousands launched this year, said at its annual 
    “Christmas in June” event that manufacturers had focused on 
    innovation to encourage creativity in children. The latest LeapPad 
    Platinum children’s tablet – suitable for children as young as 
    three – comes in at £120 but features a “fast, powerful 
    processor and sleek design” with front and back cameras, 
    music player and enhanced parental controls. 
The £40 3D Maker lets children create masterpieces ranging from 
    a butterfly to the Eiffel Tower from scratch, while parents 
    enlisted to help can be reassured that this takes just four simple 
    steps.
The £65 i-Que Intelligent Robot, also for those aged three and 
    older, uses speech-to-text technology to “literally 
    understand almost anything you say”, while even toddler 
    favourite Peppa Pig will break into a version of Ring A Ring O’ 
    Roses if her hands are held.
A spokesman for Hamleys said: “Toy manufacturers have 
    focused on innovative, imaginative play in developing new toys for 
    this Christmas. This innovation is also driving creativity in 
    children with two hi-tech craft toys featuring on the 
    list.” 
The latest Thunderbirds offering is an £80 Tracy Island playset 
    featuring interactive technology, while the new £60 Little Live 
    Pets Clever Keet - “your feathered friend who’s just like a real 
    bird only smarter” - can not only talk and respond to voices but 
    drives its own cart. 
Kinetic Sand is set to occupy little hands with its mess-free 
    liquid-like texture that never dries out, while the Shopkins 
    collectible craze looks set to continue with the £20 Ice Cream 
    Truck.
Frozen, the Disney hit film which has 
    dominated toddler merchandising in recent years, will still be 
    popular ahead of next year’s release of the sequel - with a £40 
    Skate & Sing Elsa that allows fans to relive the movie likely 
    to find its way under thousands of Christmas trees.
Donald Nairn, owner of toy shop Toys Galore in Edinburgh, said 
    technology-based toys are becoming increasingly popular across all 
    sectors.
“If you have an interactive teddy bear, your target 
    market is quite young and is less likely to be swayed by 
    advertising. However, what most older kids want is something they 
    see on TV that gets them excited. Come Christmas Day it can 
    sometimes be disappointing when the product doesn’t necessarily 
    deliver the magic promised by the advert.
“I often think that toys which try to have apps attached 
    to them don’t work very well - it sometimes seems like an 
    afterthought, that manufacturers feel they have to add a 
    technological element.”
He said he expected Lego’s new ranges - including a Lego Friends 
    popstar tour bus - and Star Wars merchandise off the back of the 
    new film, which is released in December, to be the big Christmas 
    hit.
Technology-related toys have been consistently popular in recent 
    years, although wooden toys have enjoyed a resurgence, as have 
    relaunched classics such as My Little Ponies, which were brought 
    back to shelves in the UK in 2003 with a new look.
Even retro technology toys have enjoyed a comeback, with the 
    Japanese Tamagotchi toy which sparked a craze in the 1990s, 
    relaunching two years ago. 
