Scotsman Games review: Mario & Sonic at Sochi 
    2014

IN the unlikely event that Vladimir Putin is a Wii U 
    owner, it is to be hoped that he picks up a copy of Mario & 
    Sonic at the Sochi 2014 Winter Olympic Games.
Mario & Sonic at the Sochi 2014 Winter Olympic 
    Games - Wii U (reviewed) / 3DS
Score: 6.8 / 10
With the ongoing controversy over Russia’s stance on LGBT 
    issues, it would be a delight to watch his reaction to Birdo, the 
    pink, egg-firing dinosaur with the distinction of being gaming’s 
    first, and only transgender character.
It seems a bizarre idea, but then once upon a time, so did 
    joining Mario and Sonic under the auspices of the world’s greatest 
    sporting spectacle. Sochi is the fourth Olympic-themed crossover 
    title featuring both characters and the second devoted to 
    wintersports. It is an awkward marriage of ideas which has never 
    quite won the hearts of gamers, and the latest iteration, though 
    fun in parts, is unlikely to change that.
There is a sense that the game’s designers are caught between 
    doing justice to the sporting licence and creating an imaginative 
    vehicle for the characters. Essentially a series of minigames 
    modelled around Olympic events, the need to capitalise on the 
    licence before Christmas is understandable. But arriving just weeks 
    after Wii Party U - a title which is far from perfect, but offers a 
    greater breadth of games - Mario & Sonic seems limited in 
    comparison.
The requirement to re-enact a set roster of events has resulted 
    in an imperfect control system. The game mixes and matches 
    different approaches to a confusing degree, allowing players to 
    wield a GamePad for snowboarding only to insist upon Wii Remotes 
    for downhill skiing. Neither has any major problems; the 
    frustration lies in the inconsistency. One attempt, the biathlon, 
    attempts to combine the two, but is hampered in multiplayer mode, 
    where the player with the GamePad is at a clear advantage.
There are some notable exceptions. Figure skating sees 
    characters glide along a pre-set line, with the player’s job to 
    wave and twist the Wii Remote to create a sense of rhythm and 
    style. It also allows players to choose from Mario and Sonic themes 
    as their soundtrack should classical scores like Ride of the 
    Valkyries not appeal. Hockey, too, is a fine arcade experience, 
    even if character switching using the touchscreen seems 
    unnecessarily intrusive given the X button is redundant.
The game excels when it is allowed cut the Olympic sports 
    adrift. The Dream Events mode is shot through with a playfulness we 
    have come to expect from the game’s protagonists, combining the 
    best features of each franchise. Curling is probably the best 
    example. A cure for insomniacs disguised as a sport, here it is 
    rebooted as a mini-golf game set in Green Hill Zone.
The roster of characters is extensive, but all too often serves 
    as a reminder of less memorable figures from both series, a failing 
    of the Sonic franchise in particular. Who, for example, can 
    remember, let alone wish to play Bean the Dynamite, the erratic 
    green duck from Sonic the Fighters, a brawling title released as 
    part of Sonic’s Gems Collection?
In an echo of Wii Party U, the fast pace of the minigame concept 
    is thwarted by overlong tutorials, a necessary evil given the 
    the variety of control methods the 
    game employs using the console’s range of peripherals. In a title 
    supposed to embrace throwaway fun, it is all just a bit too 
    muddled, satisfying neither Olympics fans or followers of Mario and 
    Sonic. It sneaks on to the podium, but deserves no more than a 
    bronze medal.
