How new tech changes way we build infrastructure 
 3D modelling, geographical mapping and 
    measuring performance is revolutionising the way we think, design, 
    pay for, construct and operate our buildings and infrastructure.
Within our daily lives, technology helps save us time and money, 
    either when we come to buy our weekly online groceries, reserve 
    accommodation for a weekend away or book flights online.
These computer-aided transactions enable instantaneous data 
    collection, analysis and often personalisation of the experience. 
    Essentially, our everyday life has been transformed by how we 
    interact with digital data, which in the vast majority of cases 
    saves us more time.
This same digital concept is transforming the world of 
    construction where the use of computer-based modelling coupled with 
    collaborative working practices are revolutionising how we create 
    and care for our buildings and infrastructure. Whether it’s 
    hospitals and schools or major roads and railways, we are seeing a 
    move towards a digitised construction process.
Under the title of Building Information Modelling (BIM), BIM 
    gives industry the tools to align robust data management with 
    sophisticated computer analysis to inform the evaluation and 
    modelling of design solutions. This improves the efficiency of 
    projects, during both the construction and operational phase of a 
    project.
BIM essentially lets project teams build twice; firstly in a 
    digital environment where the design can be analysed, co-ordinated 
    and optimised before secondly, being constructed on site in the 
    knowledge mistakes have been removed during the simulation of the 
    model. 
Construction is witnessing the growing importance of using data 
    for 3D modelling, geographical mapping and measuring performance 
    which is revolutionising the way we think, design, pay for, 
    construct and operate our buildings and infrastructure. This change 
    is being enabled by the BIM agenda which is being implemented 
    across the globe and is offering the outline of a construction 
    industry that buys their data once, builds right the first time, 
    has good productivity and has the ability to create buildings and 
    infrastructure that gives society the added value we all want.
So what does this all mean for the Scottish construction 
    sector?
In October 2012, the Scottish Government launched a review of 
    public sector construction procurement. Published in October 2013 
    the report identified the benefits in adopting BIM and made 
    recommendations to how Scottish Government and procuring 
    authorities should adopt BIM, including the reference that 
    “BIM will be introduced in central government with a view to 
    encouraging adoption across the public sector. The objective should 
    be that, where appropriate, projects across the public sector adopt 
    BIM level 2 by April 2017.”
The recommendations of the report were endorsed by Scottish 
    Ministers and supported by six supplementary BIM 
    recommendations.
The implementation of the recommendations is being conducted by 
    a team, comprising the Scottish Futures Trust and Scottish 
    Government. A Scottish BIM Delivery Group has been established with 
    a remit to lead, manage, co-ordinate and deliver a BIM 
    implementation plan on a day-to-day basis. The BIM Delivery Group 
    will help Scottish Government meet its objectives for a move 
    towards a digital built environment, with BIM featuring as a key 
    part for the future of the Scottish construction industry.
The BIM implementation plan will go through a series of defined 
    stages to support the Scottish public sector in their adoption of 
    BIM. This will include pilot projects where certain strands of the 
    strategy, or specific information exchanges, can be tested before 
    it is refined and published as final guidance.
The BIM Delivery Group is encouraging industry to engage with 
    the programme and get involved as soon as possible, so it is ready 
    for the programme’s implementation. There will be opportunities for 
    industry to get involved through the BIM Supplier Group Scotland 
    (BIM SGS) which will be a forum of supply-side organisations, 
    institutes and other bodies.
The BIM SGS will provide a vehicle for the Scottish BIM Delivery 
    Group to deliver updates on progress and information on a regular 
    basis. Forum members will be tasked with providing feedback, 
    disseminating information through their organisations and acting as 
    a communication platform to the Scottish supply chain.
A formal launch event is taking place in Edinburgh on 8 October, 
    by which time the first stage will have been reached and the 
    programme and its core objectives can be shared with industry. In 
    the meantime, a series of launch workshops are being facilitated to 
    determine BIM capability and capacity within the Scottish public 
    sector.
This is an exciting time for the construction industry and its 
    clients in Scotland. The digitisation of our built environment will 
    ultimately help re-shape the industry for the better, and will help 
    attract new entrants into a more innovative and advanced 
    virtualised sector. 
