RBS using technology to revolutionise banking for 
    customers 

In partnership with the Royal Bank of Scotland 
Royal Bank of Scotland’s chief administrative officer, Simon 
    McNamara, described 2016 as “the year innovation moves out of the 
    basement and into the heart of the bank” and he wasn’t wrong. Open 
    Experience, the technology solutions centre which opened in 
    February next door to business accelerator Entrepreneurial Spark’s 
    hatchery in the bank’s headquarters at Gogarburn in Edinburgh, and 
    the use of social media in the workplace are just some of the steps 
    the bank has taken towards offering innovative ways of working to 
    customers and staff.
 The new app will help people quit 
    smoking.
“We believe that the world of financial services is 
    changing dramatically, often driven by new technologies being 
    placed in the hands of our customers,” explains Kevin 
    Hanley, director of design at Royal Bank of Scotland (RBS).
“We are living in a period of rapid change and, 
    therefore, getting ahead of that curve, understanding how some of 
    these new technologies are impacting our customers and working with 
    new technology firms to develop services that benefit our customers 
    is something that we care passionately about.”
The use of social media in the workplace is becoming more widely 
    accepted. Twitter is a vital source of information for many 
    organisations, while Facebook has launched a corporate version in 
    order to tap into the business market.
Posting scouting teams in technology-rich locations across the 
    world has meant that RBS has been at the forefront of global 
    innovation.
“We built up a really important relationship with 
    Facebook through our team on the ground in San Francisco,” 
    says Hanley.
“Facebook at Work is their corporate version of Facebook. 
    Only 25 companies were allowed to pilot the use of that technology 
    and through our relationship with the team on the West Coast [of 
    the US], we were one of the companies they wanted to work with on 
    the pilot.
“We are the only financial services organisation to pilot 
    it and we now have over 40,000 of our staff and colleagues enrolled 
    in the programme.
“The reason why that’s exciting for us is not just about 
    the use of Facebook but we believe it is driving a very different 
    kind of culture across the organisation.”
“It’s collaborative,” is how Hanley describes it. 
    “You come together in groups of common interest and people 
    opt into things they want to be part of.
“We have been surprised and delighted at how the 
    organisation is adopting the tool.”
As well as the team in Silicon Valley, the bank has “scouts” in 
    Israel, keeping on top of new developments there.
“It’s a community that we recognise is offering something 
    different to the US,” says Hanley.
“Across the UK we are better connected as well into 
    innovative start-up communities. We are much better connected to 
    the Scottish entrepreneurial community, particularly through our 
    relationship with Entrepreneurial Spark.
“We work with customers to understand and identify how 
    these new technologies can benefit them.”
Online banking is nothing new. NatWest, which is part of RBS 
    Group, launched its early-stage version in 1998, with the concept 
    really taking off in the early 2000s.
In 2011, mobile banking made transactions easier for customers 
    on the move and in the five years since then, RBS’s mobile banking 
    app has gained considerable momentum.
“We now have 4 million customers using it on average 45 
    times a month,” says Chris Popple, head of digital at Royal 
    Bank of Scotland.
“Now you can do virtually any money movement. You can pay 
    your bills but probably more importantly, you can pay your contacts 
    if you know their mobile number or you can get cash out of a cash 
    machine without a card with our Get Cash feature. The mobile app is 
    very secure because it’s on a unique device that we know you have. 
    Using your fingerprint to get in makes it a lot easier to 
    use.”
But the one of the latest additions to RBS’s portfolio of 
    innovative banking services stemmed from its relationship with 
    technology giant Apple.
“They are known for customer experience so we were happy 
    to be one of the first banks to support Apple Pay [RBS launched it 
    in June 2015],” says Popple.
“For customers, it allows them to pay using their RBS 
    card virtually inside their phone.”
Feedback from RBS customers using Apple Pay shows the automatic 
    notifications that are generated each time a payment is made have 
    been a real hit.
“The customer wouldn’t ask for notifications but when 
    they get it they love it,” says Popple.
“It’s a little bit of reassurance for them and we hope we 
    can do more with that in the future.”
The smartwatch was Apple’s first venture into the wearable 
    technologies market and it’s a gadget which RBS has been quick to 
    embrace.
“Right now you can do a couple of things with the 
    watch,” Popple explains. “You can see your balance 
    and your last transactions or you can generate a Get Cash code to 
    get money out an ATM without a card.”
The team’s current project is to integrate automatic 
    notifications into Apple Watch which would update customers about 
    their balance or let them know when they are in their overdraft.
“We definitely see a world where mobile would be the 
    primary way to interact with the bank,” he adds.
“My view of technology is that it should help customers 
    do the things they want to do but it isn’t an either/or situation. 
    We can make our staff interaction with customers much more valuable 
    through technology.”
In 2015, RBS launched a bank card designed for blind and 
    partially sighted customers which features Braille markings to help 
    customers determine which is a debit card and which is for savings, 
    as well as a notch on the right hand side which makes it easier to 
    slide the card into a PIN pad or ATM. 
For the bank’s 15,000 customers who are registered blind, the 
    card has taken the stress out of shopping.
To co-incide with this year’s Deaf Awareness Week in May, RBS 
    launched a new service for British Sign Language (BSL) customers, 
    making it possible for them to chat with the bank through a BSL 
    interpreter.
The free service is available via the Royal Bank of Scotland and 
    NatWest website and the SignVideo mobile app. 
Deaf and hard of hearing BSL customers will be able to talk to 
    an adviser using their computer, tablet or smartphone via a secure 
    video call which instantly connects to an interpreter, who then 
    phones the RBS contact centre to relay the conversation in real 
    time. 
Gathering ideas and inspiration for innovative ideas to improve 
    the customer and staff experience involves collaboration with the 
    business leaders of the present and the future.
Open Experience, at RBS’s Gogarburn headquarters, is one of the 
    bank’s brand new technology centres and is a creative and 
    collaborative environment which works with customers and 
    entrepreneurs to solve problems and explore opportunities.
“In Open Experience we work quickly in small, agile teams 
    in immersive design sprints on a particular problem or 
    opportunity,” explains Kristen Bennie, head of Open 
    Experience.
“We bring people together from different areas across the 
    bank, our customer base and our network globally to solve that 
    problem or opportunity, to create a better customer experience and 
    deliver a solution that will ultimately be for the benefit of our 
    customers.
“On all of the projects we actually engage customers or 
    potential customers in the creation of the solutions that we are 
    designing and that’s a key part of how we work, using customer-led 
    design, taking an idea to a solution.”
Within Open Experience, a user testing base allows the team to 
    interact with customers and understand how they feel about a new 
    idea or solution.
The fledgling businesses from Entrepreneurial Spark’s 
    neighbouring hatchery have been making the most of Open Experience 
    since the two facilities opened in February.
“The start-up companies in Entrepreneurial Spark benefit 
    from our knowledge and expertise and we can benefit from 
    them,” explains Bennie.
