Gadget Review: Sonos Play 1 speaker

OVER the past decade, Sonos has built up a formidable 
    reputation as one of the world’s leading manufacturers of wireless 
    streaming equipment.
Sonos Play 1 speaker; RRP £169
Revered by audiophiles for its sonic quality and distinctive 
    aesthetics, the Californian firm has remained one step ahead in an 
    increasingly competitive marketplace by taking a leaf out of 
    Apple’s book and offering premium products.
Ideal introduction to Sonos brand
It is a strategy that has meant prospective Sonos customers have 
    had to pay a little more, but with the release of the Play 1, the 
    company has proved it possible to minimise costs without 
    sacrificing its trademark performance, making for a speaker that 
    serves as an ideal standalone introduction to its range, or an 
    excellent sound option for the bedroom or kitchen for those with an 
    existing Sonos setup.
Inspired by the Play 3, the compact chassis of the Play 1 can be 
    deceptive. Weighing in at 2.7kg, the 
    speaker has a reassuring heft and build quality that shows up 
    cheaper, plasticky Bluetooth devices; a steel grille covering the 
    front gives it a sturdy yet minimal design.
This approach is mirrored on the back and bottom, where there is 
    only a power connection and an ethernet input for those hooking the 
    speaker up directly to a router.
Easy and rewarding
At first, the inability to hook up an external hard drive or 
    computer feels like a missed opportunity, but once connected to a 
    home wireless network (using either a Sonos bridge or a physical 
    ethernet cable) playing music from any of the devices that clutter 
    the average home is easy, responsive and rewarding.
Controlling the output to the speaker via the Sonos app makes 
    for a functional if aesthetically spartan experience. From a 
    device’s internal music library and tracks stored elsewhere on the 
    same home network through to streaming services like Spotify and 
    Napster, choosing a playlist is straightforward, although compared 
    to other manufacturer-specific applications the layout is not quite 
    so easy on the eye.
Superb sound
Irrespective of the music chosen or the equaliser settings, 
    however, the output is superb. In small to medium sized rooms, the 
    Play 1 excels with a deep, satisfying low end that never squeezes 
    out the mid-range. With one speaker, the sound fills the space 
    convincingly and leaves you wondering how such quality is possible 
    for less than £200. Pair up two of them and the stereo separation 
    is given added depth and volume without ever becoming distorted.
Hard to beat for budget
As longtime Sonos users will attest, the ability to mix and 
    match a range of speakers can produce the ideal sound for nearly 
    any room. The Play 1 is the ideal way to enter the fray for a 
    relatively inexpensive outlay. Some may view it the first step 
    towards an expensive setup boasting multiple speakers and subs, but 
    by itself, it works just fine. If you are considering a mid-budget 
    speaker, you will struggle to beat the Play 1 for price and 
    performance.
