The virtual birth of a brave new world
THE gap - or maybe it's the rift - between the real world 
    and the virtual one has just got a little bit smaller.
Tech enthusiasts across the globe were electrified this week 
    with the news that Facebook's Oculus Rift VR (virtual reality) 
    headset is finally on sale.
Oculus claims to have radically redefined digital entertainment. 
    Fans can immerse themselves in games or even experience 
    destinations thousands of miles away. "Time travel, 
    space travel, or hang out with friends in VR," it says 
    of this stunning, 360-degree realm. "Endless worlds 
    await."
The first 30 Rift games have now gone on sale, with at least 
    another 100 to follow by the year's end.
The Oculus Rift headset won't be on sale in the UK until 
    June and though it will not come cheap, its £450 price-tag will do 
    nothing to deter those tech fans eager to explore new worlds in 
    ultra-high definition.
The new generation of HR headsets is already, however, a crowded 
    field. The entry-level Google Cardboard headsets have proved 
    popular. The Samsung Gear VR has its devotees. A new rival, HTC 
    Vive, is on the way, as is Sony’s PlayStation VR. The VR horizon 
    bristles with other companies. There's speculation that Apple 
    and Google are eyeing the field.
Virtual reality's presence has been felt for a long time 
    now - and not just in gaming.
In the early 1960s there was the Sensorama, a TV booth which 
    screened 3D films and heightened their impact with a moving chair 
    and vibration. In 1966, according to the New Scientist, the US Air 
    Force developed the first computer-driven flight simulator. Two 
    years after that, a Harvard University specialist devised a 
    head-mounted cathode ray tube display, with users exploring 
    wire-frame graphics simply by turning their head.
A huge step forward came four years ago, when Oculus Rift's 
    VR headset managed to attract $2.4 million in funding on the 
    Kickstarter crowdfunding website.
When Facebook tycoon Mark Zuckerberg bought the company behind 
    Oculus Rift two years ago for $2 billion, he wrote: “One 
    day, we believe this kind of immersive, augmented reality will 
    become a part of daily life for billions of people." He held 
    out the tantalising prospect of people enjoying a court-side seat 
    at a sports game, studying in a classroom of students and teachers 
    all over the world or consulting with a doctor face-to-face – 
    "just by putting on goggles in your home.” 
APPLICATIONS
Palmer Luckey, the 23-year-old 'tech 
    wunderkind' founder of Oculus VR, is a keen advocate 
    of the use of VR in education, highlighting the benefits for pupils 
    and students in simulating the past and exploring landmark 
    events.
In August 2015 the British Museum staged a Virtual Reality 
    Weekend. It was the first time that Samsung Gear VR devices had 
    been used to engage families with BM collections. Visitors were 
    able to explore a virtual reality Bronze Age site designed by 
    Soluis Heritage, where they saw 3D scans of objects from the 
    Museum’s collection of this period, placed in their original 
    setting.
One new app, which has been funded via Kickstarter, is seen by 
    its makers as a tribute to "an incredible moment in 
    human history" – the Apollo 11 moon-landings in 1969. 
    Its premise is simple: Using VR, you will become Neil Armstrong on 
    what is the 20th century's "most enduring 
    achievement."
“There’s a lot of potential for virtual reality in the 
    education industry,” Luckey has said. “Classrooms are broken. Kids 
    don’t learn the best by reading books. Even if visiting Paris for 
    real is something that’s better [than doing it with VR] it’s not 
    something that eight, nine, 10 billion people in the world are 
    going to be able to do.”
Fiction or documentary films made with VR have been another 
    notable growth area. Subjects have ranged from child refugees, the 
    aftermath of the Nepal earthquake and a reconstruction of the death 
    of Trayvon Martin, a 17 year-old African American shot dead by a 
    neighbourhood watch volunteer in 2012.
Healthcare has not been slow to recognise the potential of HR, 
    bringing it to everything from surgery simulation to robotic 
    surgery. Fortune magazine says: "Mobile virtual reality 
    devices like Google Cardboard, Gear VR, and VR One are changing the 
    way hospitals and health care providers are training doctors, 
    nurses and medical personnel."
Perhaps inevitably, pornography has also been quick to seize on 
    the potential of VR, just as it alighted on video-tapes. One writer 
    who bravely sampled various forms of VR porn has described the 
    "unsettling" detail of one film in which 
    the viewer is placed inside a woman's body. 
VR IN SCOTLAND
One Scottish company which understands the prevailing trend of 
    VR is the Edinburgh-based Eyedak, responsible for a device called 
    vrAse, which was released two years ago and turns your handset into 
    a VR headset. Eyedak's CEO, Miguel Schiaffino, says: 
    “VR will be more mainstream as time passes because 
    smartphone capabilities will grow. As long as people keep using the 
    smartphone and using them wherever they go, VR tech will continue 
    to get more mainstream. Think about what we use smartphones for 
    today; communications, interaction with our daily lives (photos, 
    bookings, writing, recording) but on a greater scale in the future 
    as people will grow more dependent on smartphones.
“We will start becoming dependent on it because 
    mainstream VR will be based around the smartphone and we’re already 
    addicted to that. Change is the only constant in the universe. Some 
    will embrace it and others won’t, which is an old story, really. 
    Everything will be revolutionised.”
Alistair Rawlinson, Head of Data Acquisition at the Glasgow 
    School of Art, has an entire Digital Design Studio to work with.
Says Rawlinson: “VR technology is on the cusp of breaking 
    into everyday use. Over the past few years the development of 
    head-mounted displays [HMDs] has seen a significant push with 
    headsets becoming more technologically advanced in terms of screen 
    resolution and motion tracking as well as becoming more affordable. 
    With technology like the Samsung Gear VR, Oculus Rift and the Vive 
    as well as large companies such as Facebook, Sony and Microsoft 
    involved in their development, their exposure to large markets 
    increases.
“The Digital Design Studio has made good use of VR 
    technology in our detailed digital documentation and 3D modelling 
    of the Mackintosh Building at the Glasgow School of Art post-fire. 
    The data is currently being used to aid the ongoing conservation 
    work with the creation of a building information model.” 
    
THE DOWNSIDE
VR-as-entertainment has been around for long enough for some 
    observers to note potential drawbacks. The wiseGEEK website has 
    helpfully listed some of them: "One issue is social 
    isolation, in which the user of virtual reality relies more on 
    interactions that take place in a virtual world than on experiences 
    in the real world. This lack of true, physical interaction has the 
    potential to create incorrect associations that are not part of 
    real social settings. The isolation could eventually cause 
    depression, disassociation and other conditions, if it is severe 
    enough." Desensitisation is another possible 
    disadvantage, it added.
For Shari Frilot, chief curator of Sundance Film Festival's 
    New Frontiers section, however, VR-as-entertainment is not 
    necessarily an isolating experience. “I know there’s a lot 
    of anxiety about VR being an individual experience, and number one: 
    that’s not a bad thing," she was quoted as saying in 
    January. "Part of the VR experience, the power of it, 
    is that it’s fully immersive around your individual body. I don’t 
    think that it’s isolating. I’ve been watching VR at the festival 
    since 2012, and I’ve seen people getting excited about watching 
    their friends go through it, talking about it, wanting to share it. 
    It’s an intensely social experience.”
Tom Wiggins, Deputy Editor of Stuff Magazine, says: 
    "I've used all three of the major headsets (Oculus 
    Rift, HTC Vive and Playstation VR) and I think the benefits 
    outweigh the drawbacks but there certainly are one or two that 
    can't be ignored. At the moment, cost is definitely the 
    biggest barrier. It's not just the headsets that are 
    expensive; in order to run one you need a pretty pricey, high-end 
    PC. This will obviously come down over time but right now 
    it'll put all but the most dedicated early adopter off. 
    It's a shame because the experiences can be really 
    mind-blowing.
"There's also the challenge of how to translate 
    movement into the game world. HTC's Vive tackles this by using 
    sensors that need to be positioned around the room you're 
    playing in but in order to work properly you need fairly 
    significant floor space. Some people have also suffered from a 
    version of motion sickness when using VR, but I think that's 
    likely to be reduced as the tech gets better, screen resolution 
    goes up and refresh rates increase."
BBC News tech reporter Zoe Kleinman knows what he is talking 
    about. At a VR demo in January she “virtually” climbed Mount 
    Everest, the Himalayas all around her in stunning detail. But she 
    had a bad case of motion sickness in the next demo, in which she 
    floated in a glass-windowed dome above earth. "I 
    started to feel very hot and very disorientated," she 
    wrote. "I was tumbling around, bumping into walls and 
    debris and no longer knew which way was up. My virtual space helmet 
    visor was cracking. Within about 30 seconds I wanted to rip the 
    helmet off and run to the bathroom." 
VR IN CULTURE
Virtual reality has long intrigued authors and film-makers. Back 
    in 1992, for example, there was a film, The Lawnmower Man, starring 
    a pre-007 Pierce Brosnan. In the words of the Den of Geek website, 
    this "curious" movie is 
    "quintessentially 90s. It has virtual reality helmets, 
    Pierce Brosnan in white shorts, those spinning aerotrim gyroscope 
    things you don't see very much anymore, gratuitous sex scenes, 
    and lots of once novel computer graphics."
The Sundance film festival, ever alert to new trends, featured 
    VR offerings at its 2016 showcase in January. The Funny or Die 
    collective ran its first virtual reality project, Interrogation, 
    which was shot in full 360-degree 3-D. Starring comedians Rob 
    Heubel and Paul Sheer, it allowed viewers to experience the 
    sensation of what it was like to be the suspect of a horrible crime 
    in the hot seat of an interrogation room, "getting 
    grilled by the worst detectives in the business". The 
    project, says Funny or Die, "sends comedy into an 
    entirely new medium, blurring the lines between sketch and 
    reality".
Another VR hit at Sundance 2016 allowed viewers to walk on the 
    surface of Star Wars’ planet Jakku.
The many virtual reality films have included Christopher 
    Nolan's Inception, the Wachowski Brothers' groundbreaking 
    Matrix franchise, and David Cronenberg's eXistenZ. Among VR 
    books are William Gibson's Neuromancer and Neal 
    Stephenson's Snowcrash. Michael Abrash, Chief Scientist at 
    Oculus, has never forgotten a scene in Robert A Heinlein’s 1939 
    short story, Misfit, in which a captain straps himself into the 
    saddle of the “ponderous integral calculator” in order to compute a 
    spaceship’s orbit.
