Scots game designers develop 3D digital anatomy training 
    tool
 A 3D anatomy model devised by Abertay University for 
    medical students in Aberdeen.
Computer game designers are working with anatomists in 
    the North East on a “quantum leap” in the training 
    of doctors and medical scientists of the future.
The gaming software experts at Abertay University are 
    collaborating with anatomists at Aberdeen University to create a 
    series of highly accurate and interactive 3D models of human organs 
    which can be virtually dissected by students.
Human specimens, which fall under heavy regulation, will still 
    be used in class but it is hoped the 3D models will make teaching 
    anatomy more flexible while increasing understanding of how the 
    human body works.
Dr Flora Gröning, an anatomy lecturer at the University of 
    Aberdeen and coordinator of the project, said the models were the 
    “first of their kind”.
She added: “This software will be of huge benefit to our 
    students and will allow them access to incredibly detailed 
    recreations of body parts, in addition to the time they already get 
    with real specimens. This can only boost their learning experience 
    and understanding of the human body which will serve them well as 
    they go forward in their careers.
 Laura Perez, research 
    assitant at Aberdeen University, is compiling anatomical 
    images for the project.
“This is a quantum leap in teaching tools in terms of 
    what is currently available – such as plastic models or simplified 
    digital models - and we hope, once the project is complete, it can 
    benefit students across the world.”
The models are generated by the photogrammetry process which 
    takes individual photographs of a specimen at slightly different 
    angles and compiles the images digitally to create a fully 
    interactive 3D model.
The Aberdeen team currently creates its own anatomy animations 
    but the collaboration with Abertay University, which 
    s funded by the Roland Sutton 
    Academic Trust, will create a virtual environment that will allow 
    for far greater “more exciting” interaction.
Professor Alan Denison, MBChB Programme Lead at the University 
    of Aberdeen and Consultant Radiologist at NHS Grampian said: 
    “Aberdeen has a proud history of using state-of-the-art 
    technology to make Anatomy teaching an exciting, immersive and 
    clinically-centred experience. This latest innovation keeps us at 
    the frontier of learning today as we prepare our future clinicians 
    and scientists for tomorrow’s challenges.”
Dr Robin Sloan of Abertay University said: “Computer 
    games technologies have huge potential beyond the gaming arena 
    through their ability to create genuinely interactive virtual 
    environments that can massively enhance interactions and 
    experiences for people in all kinds of settings.
“This project is an ideal demonstration of how learning 
    can be transformed for anatomy students, and the principles and 
    techniques are equally applicable across a wide range of other 
    disciplines too.”
