iPhone 6 launch: What can we expect from Apple?

by ANGUS HOWARTH
APPLE is set to launch the iPhone 6 at an event 
    tonight in California, but what can we expect from the tech 
    giants?
The company has already boldly claimed that it has its best 
    products in a quarter of a century ready to release. Here, we look 
    at what chief executive Tim Cook may announce when he takes to the 
    stage this evening.
iPhone 6
The latest model of Apple’s iPhone is set to be unveiled at the 
    event.
Smartphones represent over half of Apple’s revenue, and two 
    models of the iPhone 6 are due to be revealed.
It is thought that the two models will have different screen 
    sizes, with one measuring 5.5in and the other 4.7in. The iPhone 5S 
    measures just 4in.
The new phone is also likely to be at least partly made from 
    scratch-resistant material as well as wireless payment 
    capabilities.
iWatch
This is the big one, of course, given that Apple’s rivals have 
    already rolled out ‘wearable tech’.
A number of leading fashion editors and bloggers have been 
    invited to the event leading to speculation that the much-vaunted 
    iWatch will finally be unveiled.
However, industry experts have predicted that it might not be 
    released until some time in 2015.
Speculation is growing that the iWatch would be able to track 
    the wearer’s health and fitness and display messages among other 
    functions.
iOS8
The new iPhone will introduce the new Apple operating system - 
    iOS8 - to the world.
But the launch of iOS8 is likely to be held back.
The new operating system was confirmed by Apple at the WWDC 2014 
    event, and resembles iOS7 in appearance.
However, it is expected to come with a number of updated and new 
    features, including the ability to carry out tasks on Mac PCs 
    running OS X Yosemite and other iDevices.
The notification centre has been upgraded to allow users to deal 
    with messages or emails without leaving the lockscreen, as well as 
    an enhanced battery manager which will allow users to manage or 
    even uninstall apps using up a lot of battery life.
The Handoff feature will let users start a task on any device 
    running iOS8 and complete it on another.
Siri has been given an extensive update, as has the iMessage 
    function and the Photos app.
The new Health app will collate heart rate, sleep patterns, 
    oxygen levels etc. through third-party apps such as Nike and 
    Fidbit.
The Camera will have a timelapse function similar to Instagram’s 
    Hyperlapse while the Family Sharing service allows sharing of what 
    a user has bought from iTunes, iBooks and the App Stores through 
    the same credit or debit card with up to six people.
Anything else?
Apple has a history of springing surprises at its events, and 
    executives have done nothing to dampen growing excitement ahead of 
    this launch.
Possible surprises announcements could include a bigger iPad, 
    Apple television or something completely different. Watch this 
    space...
