TOPredicting the top ten technology trends for 2016 
    
 Mobile phones and virtual reality 
    equipment are just two things predicted to grow further in 
    popularity this year.
1 mobile eats the 
    Internet
The numbers of mobile devices dwarfs the total number of PCs on 
    the planet. Your desktop computer might as well be an old mainframe 
    as tasks which could only be done on a PC can now be performed, 
    often better, on a mobile device. What’s more, these devices “know” 
    more about the world from built in sensors, accelerometers, GPS and 
    more. This means a ­fundamentally ­different interaction with 
    technology. 
2. Virtual Reality
After so many years of promise, 2016 is the year when truly 
    immersive virtual reality (VR) will happen. Using products such as 
    Oculus or Google Cardboard is a transformative experience, which 
    will affect so much more than games. Suddenly social presence 
    becomes possible with millions of people being able to meet online 
    in a new way. Amazing Scottish companies such as Speech Graphics 
    are leading the way in thinking about this sort of technology and 
    the opportunity is huge. 
3. Healthcare software saves the NHS
We are incredibly lucky to have a healthcare system such as the 
    NHS and we regularly read of the rising costs due to an ageing 
    population and other factors. New software is set to address issues 
    across healthcare from bringing smart data analytics to patient 
    records, new tools for drug discovery and technology to help 
    decision making inside hospitals. Pioneering companies such as 
    RelayMed and EO Surgical are leading the way. 
4. Self-driving cars become accepted
Our children will listen in astonishment to our tales of driving 
    our own vehicles. Self-driving cars are real and are set to save 
    lives, lower global ­emissions (think of all that unnecessary 
    braking and accelerating). A car then becomes a commodity. How does 
    retail change when no-one needs to own a car? What will the next 
    status symbol be when no-one cares about the 0-60 speed? 
5. Educational software changes learning for good
The traditional education ­system was created to make good 
    factory workers and it simply doesn’t serve our children well in a 
    world where learning facts is pointless and creativity is 
    everything. New educational technology is already beginning to 
    change the way we learn and Scotland is well placed to take 
    advantage of this. Companies such as CogBooks and Administrate are 
    set to explode onto the international stage. 
6. Work is better with your own device
There are now so many ­fantastic cheap and even free tools 
    available on mobile that employees are often performing tasks on 
    their own phones because the experience is ­simpler and more 
    ­efficient than the official work tool (think swapping shifts, 
    organising who will do what, etc). Start-ups such as Slack will 
    continue to seize control of this space in 2016. 
7. Mobile means personalisation on steroids 
In the old days when phoning a landline, you were phoning a 
    physical location and hoping that the person would be there. Today, 
    you phone the person and have no idea where they are. The mobile 
    phone is personal and new technology is allowing a series of 
    increasingly rich and highly personal experiences, linking in with 
    all aspects of our lives. 
8. The internet of money
The rise of new technology in finance will bring democracy to 
    banking. This will help cut corruption in the third world and help 
    small businesses to trade with each other. 
9. The Internet of Things becomes invisible… and 
    wins
People have discussed the rise of cheap sensors and the 
    “Internet of Things” for some years now. As these sensors appear 
    everywhere and practically every device is connected in some way to 
    the internet, that tech disappears from our sight. And it is that 
    very disappearance which means that the technology is ubiquitous. 
    
10. The way we build tech startups becomes the way all 
    businesses are built
The way that technology startup companies begin is very 
    ­different to the traditional factory model of company creation. 
    Building rapidly and finding Product Market Fit, using lean 
    processes to rapidly learn if we are building the right thing. 
    These ideas and more will move out from the tech world an in to 
    normal business creation. 
