License to print 3D masterpieces

Take a look at a 3D printer in action and you will soon get an 
    idea of what it can do. I watched a small 3D printer produce a 
    hand-sized bust of the Egyptian queen Nefertiti; an elaborate ring 
    for my finger; and a model of the Parthenon that now sits on my 
    desk, all at the push of a button from plastic, at low cost, with 
    very little waste.
However, 3D printing, known as additive manufacturing, will be 
    used for far more than gimmicks and toys. So it is no surprise that 
    the concept has fired the imagination of everyone from creatives in 
    design through to industry, the medical field, multinational 
    corporations, and even governments. In his State of the Union 
    address in February, US president Barack Obama declared that 3D 
    printing had “the potential to revolutionise the way we make 
    almost everything”.
As with any new technological development today, you will find 
    those that say it will change everything for the better in no time 
    at all, and those who prophesy doom and gloom. Those on the side of 
    The End is Nigh worry that it will see us all printing guns and 
    drones in our homes, and displacing people in low-skilled 
    manufacturing jobs. Those on the side of the hype make breathless 
    proclamations about how it will democratise innovation (we all 
    could print our own products in our own home and become widely 
    successful); will bring about a revolution in manufacturing; and 
    significantly revive the economy. The Economist has compared it to 
    the printing press, the steam engine and the transistor. 
Both factions overestimate the power of this technology.
In the art world some have become animated about possibilities 
    and some great claims require a deal of scrutiny. This is not 
    because it is does not have potential but hopes tend to 
    underestimate social, political and cultural factors that influence 
    the making and meaning of things. The 3D printer is great at 
    producing objects that have already been invented and it can 
    stimulate invention by making it easy to produce the embryo of an 
    idea of an object, but we cannot rely on it to invent things from 
    scratch. There are already too many artists using the technology as 
    if the technology is so interesting that their work is good by 
    default, but there is only so much a very able printer can do.
Elsewhere, scientists at the Delft University of Technology in 
    Holland have been beavering away to try and produce 3D 
    reproductions of artistic masterpieces. They have built a scanner 
    that records depth and colour in such incredible detail that some 
    say it results in a printed picture that has all the complexity of 
    the original, down to the appearance and indentation of every 
    pocket, lump and bump of paint. The team have produced a 3D 
    reproduction of Rembrandt’s The Jewish Bride, one of his 
    self-portraits and one of van Gogh’s sunflowers.
Fujifilm, the Japanese firm, have developed a process which not 
    only replicates the painting, but also the frame and even the back 
    of the work. Together with the van Gogh Museum in Amsterdam they 
    have made copies of five of the artist’s paintings, in limited 
    editions, which have sold for as much as £21,000. The idea is not 
    just that we can then hang them in our living rooms without paying 
    the millions of pounds required for an original, but that galleries 
    and museums could show them. Muritshuis Museum in the Hague is 
    talking to the Delft University project with a view to hanging a 
    van Gogh in an exhibition. It’s as good as the real thing, some 
    say, so hang and an audience will flock.
The technology and results are impressive, but there are critics 
    who question just how good the reproductions could ever be. From 
    what I have seen, there is a clear and visible difference between 
    the real painting and the reproductions due to tone, texture, 
    colour and light. Even with paint it is hard for the best forgers 
    to come up with something that no one can tell is a fake. But that 
    is not the only question for me. There is also the issue of 
    originality and authenticity.
Originality and authenticity are important when it comes to what 
    we treasure in art. Not every work of art, mind, not the more 
    practical or useful items, not some architecture and design – but 
    great work will always be seen as a one off. There there are 
    historical and cultural instances where this is not the case – 
    originality and authenticity is specific to a certain time and 
    place rather than applicable across the whole of human history – 
    but with the Renaissance, the idea of the artist genius emerged and 
    it’s never really gone away in the West. I would bet good money 
    that no-one would pay to see a printed van Gogh no matter how 
    similar it was if the real van Gogh work was available, because 
    they would like to see the one that he did, with his fingerprints 
    and brushstrokes. This is in part, I think, because we identify the 
    original work with the origination of the idea of it, and that 
    cannot be found elsewhere.
Couple this point with the demands of an art market, and there 
    are reasons for why we will never accept a printed reproduction no 
    matter how good it could be in the future. The 3D printed van Goghs 
    that went for tens of thousands of pounds did not cost that much to 
    make, after all. The market in art inflated them and that is 
    reliant on the idea of the unique work and the genius of the 
    artist, not the technology or materials.
If this was all going to change with technological developments, 
    it would have done so already with mass production. Major changes 
    in production in the last century did not eradicate the idea that 
    the original work of art is unique. Take photography, this is 
    instantly replicable and yet for a recognised photographic work you 
    pay a great deal for limited editions and even more for the real 
    thing. Photography still requires the idea of the first printed 
    photo which will always be the most valued.
Ultimately, 3D printing will never be as good as real painting 
    in our galleries and museums. Let’s keep things in perspective. No 
    printer can master the Old Masters.
