Scottish fact of the week: The Falkirk Wheel

by ADAM TERRIS
A marvel of Scottish engineering, the Falkirk Wheel in 
    central Scotland, completed in 2002, is known as the world’s first 
    and only rotating boat lift.
Set with the task of making the historic Forth & Clyde and 
    Union Canals of Scotland 
    accesible, the ‘Millenium Link’, as the project came to be 
    known, offered a corridor of regenerative activity through central 
    Scotland. However, the problem of a 35 metre height difference 
    between the lowly Forth & Clyde canal and the higher Union 
    canal proved a stumbling block. Previously these canals had been 
    connected by a staggered series of 11 locks over a mile, but these 
    locks had since been removed. A solution therefore was the world’s 
    first rotating boat lift.
Rotating boat lifts had first been conceptualised in the 19th 
    Century, but it was not until 1994, in Falkirk, that it was taken 
    seriously. Ideas for the Falkirk Wheel included concepts such as 
    see-saws, rolling eggs, and monorails but the final structure was 
    one that included both suitability and design.
The Falkirk Wheel was constructed like one giant Meccano set at 
    Butterley Engineering’s Steelworks in Derbyshire, England. 35 
    lorries then transported the pieces up to Falkirk before putting it 
    all together once again. It required 45,000 bolt holes and 15,000 
    bolts in order to make it secure, with each bolt being hand 
    tightened.
The wheel works by taking a boat down in the gondola containing 
    the water it came with, whilst the same weight comes up from the 
    opposite side. Due to the use of the water’s weight and the balance 
    of each end, it takes as little as 1.5kWh of energy to turn the 
    wheel, which, to put into context, is less energy than it takes to 
    power a washing machine.
Since its construction in 2002, the Falkirk Wheel has become a 
    popular tourist destination with around 400,000 visitors coming to 
    see the structure every year. 10 years after its construction, 4.4 
    million people have gone through the visitors centre’s doors, with 
    1.3 million taking a boat trip on the wheel.
