Invisible ‘second skin’ reverses signs of ageing – for 24 
    hours 

An invisible "second skin" that scientists have 
    developed that can banish bags and wrinkles and could be used to 
    treat medical conditions as well as the visible signs of ageing. 
    Picture: PA 
An invisible “second skin” has been developed that 
    irons out wrinkles, eliminates eye bags, and can banish visible 
    signs of ageing in an instant.
The new material, applied in a two-step process, both protects 
    and tightens the skin, while allowing it to hold moisture and 
    breathe.
It has the potential to make anyone on the wrong side of 40 look 
    years younger - but currently, the effect only lasts 24 hours.
Scientists expect the silicon-based “biomimetic film” will 
    initially be used for medical purposes, such as treating dermatitis 
    and other skin conditions.
As well as appealing to the vain, the “skin” could in future be 
    used to dress wounds, screen out harmful sun rays, or deliver 
    pharmaceutical drugs.
Professor Robert Langer, who led the team from the Massachusetts 
    Institute of Technology (MIT) in the US, said: “Developing a second 
    skin that is invisible, comfortable and effective in holding in 
    water and potentially other materials presents many different 
    challenges.
“It has to have the right optical properties, otherwise it won’t 
    look good, and it has to have the right mechanical properties, 
    otherwise it won’t have the right strength and it won’t perform 
    correctly.
“We are extremely excited about the opportunities that are 
    presented as a result of this work and look forward to further 
    developing these materials to better treat patients who suffer from 
    a variety of skin conditions.”
The material, called XPL, was developed over five years of 
    research during which more than 100 different polymers - large 
    molecules made up of linked smaller units - were tested.
All contained a chemical structure known as siloxane, a chain of 
    alternating atoms of silicon and oxygen.
The winning formula produced an elastic transparent material 
    composed of cross-linked molecules which can be stretched invisibly 
    over the skin.
XPL is applied as a cream or ointment in two layers. The first 
    contains the key components and the second a platinum catalyst that 
    causes the material to stiffen into a resilient coating which 
    remains in place for 24 hours.
In elasticity tests, the material easily bounced back to its 
    original state after being stretched by more than 250% - 
    outperforming natural skin which can only be stretched by about 
    180%.
Other studies conducted with the help of volunteers showed how 
    XPL tightened skin under the eyes to remove sagging bags, and 
    improved the stretchability of skin on the forearms.
Skin covered by the film was also able to retain much more water 
    than when treated with a top-of-the-range commercial 
    moisturiser.
Dermatologist Professor Barbara Gilchrest, from Massachusetts 
    General Hospital, another member of the team whose work is 
    described in the journal Nature Materials, said: “Creating a 
    material that behaves like skin is very difficult.
“Many people have tried to do this, and the materials that have 
    been available up until this have not had the properties of being 
    flexible, comfortable, non-irritating, and able to conform to the 
    movement of the skin and return to its original shape.”
None of the volunteers reported any irritation to the skin 
    caused by wearing XPL.
The scientists wrote: “We report here that a new, two-step, 
    flowable polysiloxane-based formulation, applied topically and 
    cross-linked in situ to form an ‘invisible’ thin film on human 
    skin, can provide a durable, skin-conforming elastic ‘second 
    skin’.
“This ‘second skin’ is wearable, moisturising, safe, well 
    tolerated, and provides enhanced mechanical integrity to the 
    underlying skin.
“The proof-of-concept human studies showed that XPL contraction 
    reliably reshapes the skin surface, as well as mechanically 
    flattening herniated fat pads that cause under-eye bagging.”
The team included researchers from US hair product and skin care 
    company Living Proof Inc.
A new company, Olivo Labs, has been spun out of Living Proof Inc 
    to focus on developing the XPL technology.
