Generating better energy outcomes 
 Using a wide array of technological 
    measures and changes in behaviour we could minimise the impact of 
    climate change.
THERE was good and bad news from Berlin this month. The bad news 
    is global emissions of greenhouse gases have risen to unprecedented 
    levels, despite government efforts globally to reduce human impacts 
    on the global climate. The good news is that we have an increasing 
    number of exciting and affordable options available to reduce 
    emissions, whilst maintaining our high standard of life. The 
    occasion for the news was the launch of the new report by the 
    Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), an organisation 
    set up by governments to help review and translate the published 
    scientific literature on climate change. Depressingly it shows that 
    global emissions grew more quickly between 2000 and 2010 than in 
    each of the three previous decades, to nearly 50 billion tonnes of 
    carbon dioxide equivalent per year.
The report is a clarion call for clear international leadership 
    and action. It also makes clear that issues of equity, justice and 
    fairness are increasingly important for finding solutions that all 
    countries can agree on. 
According to the report, it would be possible, using a wide 
    array of technological measures and changes in behaviour, to 
    minimise the impact of climate change on our global societies. 
    However, only major institutional and technological change will 
    offer a better than even chance of keeping the global climate 
    within thresholds above which increasingly detrimental impacts will 
    occur. 
And there is more good news – many of the technologies we need 
    to make this shift already exist. And they are affordable.
As always when it comes to climate change the question of how 
    certain are we about the science and how can we possibly know about 
    the future is quickly raised.
The issue is about understanding and managing risks: risks of 
    doing something now that might cost a lot of money but pays off in 
    the future, or the risk of not doing something now, which becomes 
    hugely costly in future.
For this report, about 1,200 scenarios from the scientific 
    literature were analysed, drawing on scenarios generated by 31 
    modelling teams around the world. They aimed to explore the 
    economic, technological and institutional assumptions and 
    implications of pathways to reduce emissions. The working group 
    writing the report consisted of 235 authors and 38 review editors 
    from 57 countries, and 180 experts provided additional input as 
    contributing authors. More than 800 experts from around the world 
    reviewed drafts of the report.
Scotland also had their representatives. Professor Pete Smith, 
    science director of ClimateXChange, was a convening lead author. He 
    is and will continue to be a key adviser to the Scottish Government 
    on how to develop government policies and practice that support a 
    low carbon economy and help develop long-term solutions. 
So what should the Scottish Government – and governments around 
    the world – do?
We need to stabilise greenhouse gas concentrations in the 
    atmosphere by reducing emissions from all aspects of our society – 
    energy production and use, transport, buildings, industry, land 
    use, and all other human activity. This will mean making changes to 
    the way in which we produce and use energy (and land) right across 
    everyday life, business and the way we travel. 
Scotland has some of the leading targets in the world for 
    reducing emissions. It is widely admired for its efforts at 
    increasing the generation of renewable electricity. But we are also 
    seeing massive efforts from countries like China, who are the 
    biggest investors in renewable energy in the world. This year they 
    will be building more renewable energy generation than exists in 
    the whole of the UK.
But perhaps most importantly, using energy more productively is 
    key. As a society, we waste vast quantities of energy. Yet with the 
    availability of new energy technology, and availability of 
    information, for example through smart phones, we can deliver the 
    outcomes we seek – for warm homes and efficient mobility – with 
    much lower energy use.
So while the challenge is massive and serious, Scottish 
    researchers are at the forefront of providing the evidence for 
    sound government policies to build a low-carbon society. The 
    solutions are many and have multiple benefits. 
