TODO
 The paper that will be discussed is the “Service users’ 
    perceptions of student nurses” which was 
published in the Nursing Times in 2014 (Barksby, 2014). The 
    paper aimed to explore the experience 
of service users’ who came into contact with student nurses 
    within their care facilities. 
 The paradigm in which this study was situated within is 
    interpretivism. This can be used in all 
qualitative research as the researcher interacts with the 
    research that is taking place. They are not an 
objective outside observer as they would be with quantitative 
    research (Milburn, et al., 1998). 
 The study design that was used in this research paper was that 
    of interpretive phenomenological 
analysis, this allowed for the exploration of the personal and 
    social world of the research participants. 
It allowed for the researcher to gain insight into the 
    experience of the service users’ when 
    interacting 
with students (Smith & Osborn, 2003). The sample was 
    selected from service users’ that have 
    had 
contact with the NHS learning disability service. It was unclear 
    from the paper which form of 
sampling had been used. It may have been purposive sampling or 
    volunteer sampling, they may have 
asked for volunteers from the group or selected volunteers from 
    within the group (Parahoo, 2014). 
Data was collected for the study using a semi-structured 
    interview, in which the researcher gives the 
interviewers a list of questions to guide the interview, along 
    with options to expand upon the answers 
given by the interviewee (Holloway & Wheeler, 2010). The 
    data was analysed using applied thematic 
analysis, which was used to identify key themes within the data 
    provided by the service users’ (Guest 
    
, et al., 2012). There were three key themes identified; 
    positive response, indifference, and poor-quality 
students. 
 The data collection method used was that of semi-structured 
    interviews, as stated above the 
interviewer was guided by the researcher as to what questions 
    were to be asked and how to guide the 
interview, this is called an interview guide (Parahoo, 2014, pp. 
    318-320). In quantitative research the 
interview questions are known as an interview schedule, this is 
    a more rigid structure than is used for 
qualitative research (Holloway & Wheeler, 2010). Some of the 
    strengths for how the data was 
collected are as follows: the interview schedule, face to face 
    interviews, same questions asked of all 
participants, allowed for expansion and probing of answers by 
    the interviewer, order of questions was 
flexible to allow for natural flow of conversation. 
 The first strength seen is the interview guide. For this 
    semi-structured interview, it was developed 
by the staff nurses who act as student mentors and a lecturer in 
    nursing. This should have meant that 
the questions posed would have been at an appropriate level for 
    the service users’, with enough scope 
    
that the interviewer could reword them to effectively ask the 
    questions (Drever, 1995). A strength 
linked to the interview guide is that all of the questions asked 
    of the participants should be the same, 
an example of a question used was “How do you feel when 
    student nurses leave? Do students say goodbye?” (Barksby, 
    2014). Only a few examples of questions were provided in the 
    research paper, it 
is said that in the paper that 
    interviewers could ask probing questions but did not state whether 
    they 
came up with them or whether they were provided (Barksby, 2014). 
    This could affect the data 
collected from the interviewee as they may have been prompted 
    for more information in some cases 
and in other cases the interviewer may not have asked for the 
    same level of detail (Drever, 1995). 
Using probing questions and prompts can allow there to be more 
    understanding for the interviewee of 
what they are being asked, this should allow for more detailed 
    answers to be given. Probes are a 
characteristic of an inductive research approach, aiming to 
    gather more detail rather than less, this 
allows the researcher to gain greater understanding of people as 
    humans (Blumer, 1969). Another 
part of the interview guide that can affect response is the type 
    of question that has been used. The type 
used appears to be closed, but only a few example questions were 
    given in the paper, so it cannot be 
generalised that all of the questions were closed.  
 Using an interview guide can enable researchers to compare the 
    answers to specific questions, 
thus allowing them to look for themes in the research and carry 
    out a thematic analysis. Unlike a 
structured interview a semi-structured interview allows for the 
    expansion and probing of answers, 
whereas structured interviews allow for clarification rather 
    than increasing the depth of the answer 
(Parahoo, 2014, pp. 311-318). The ability to reword a question 
    means that the language can be 
simplified depending on the service users’ level of 
    understanding. From the example questions shown 
the language appears to be simple and there being closed 
    questions should allow for simple answers, 
that can be expanded upon if the service user wished or was 
    prompted to. 
 When using a semi-structured interview allowing the interviewee 
    to guide the conversation allows 
the researcher to gain more in-depth data about the topic that 
    has been discussed, this can enable a 
broader scope for the thematic analysis. When organising the 
    interview guide the questions should be 
ordered in a way that any that could be deemed invasive are not 
    used first. It is unclear how the 
questions have been ordered, but it is important to consider 
    that some questions may be upsetting for 
service users’ and this could affect 
    further answers (Barksby, 2014). 
 Using a face to face interview for each participant was 
    beneficial as it removed potential barriers 
such as being unable to use a computer for video chatting or not 
    having been able to use a telephone 
for communication. The service users’ 
    may have had a wide range of communication abilities, 
meaning face to face interviews would have allowed the 
    interviewer to make a clinical judgement as 
to the best way to communicate and allowed them to adapt their 
    questioning style to suit the 
individuals’ needs. 
 Along with the other aspects of a semi-structured interview a 
    key one that can affect the data 
collected is the interviewer gathering the data. Wheeler posed 
    that the attributes needed to be an 
effective counsellor are the same as those needed to be an 
    effective interviewer for qualitative 
research (Wheeler, 2000). One of the attributes of an effective 
    interviewer is that they should be 
empathetic to the interviewee and show understanding of how the 
    person was feeling without they 
themselves becoming emotionally involved with the interview. The 
    way the interviewer presents 
themselves can also affect the interview, so they should dress 
    appropriately but not so to intimidate 
the interviewee (Drever, 1995, pp. 50-52). Effective 
    interviewers must also be able to assert control 
when needed (Drever, 1995). Information checking is also 
    important, the interviewer must ensure that 
they have recorded and understood the correct data from the 
    interviewee, this allows the interviewee 
to change or alter the information if they feel it was not 
    correct. Active listening is also considered 
    to useful when interviewing, it 
    prompts the interviewee to continue to expand on the point that 
    they are 
making and can give a deeper answer (Ritchie, et al., 2013). We 
    do not know who the interviewer was 
for the Service users' perceptions of student nurses study, 
    it would be assumed that they would be 
trained how to interview for research and have some experience 
    working or interacting with people 
with learning disabilities. 
 The interviewer can be both a strength and a weakness for 
    semi-structured interviews. No details 
about the interviews were provided in the study other than the 
    time, number of interviewees and 
several example questions. Someone who has never spent time with 
    people with learning disabilities 
may unintentionally put up barriers between themselves and the 
    interviewee. The ability to adapt the 
questions could have been imperative to being able to gain fully 
    informed answers from the service 
users'. 
 Another weakness with semi 
    structured interviews could be the interview guide, 
    this is a very 
useful tool if it has been made whilst closely considering the 
    research questions, but if it has not then 
it can lead the interview away from the research questions and 
    the information gathered may not be 
relevant to the research aim or question.   
 Overall when using interviews, the results can be affected by 
    the honesty of the participants, they 
may want to tell the interviewer what they think they want to 
    hear, this means the information is not 
always reliable. 
 The study is relevant to clinical practice as it can inform the 
    staff and students, who have contact 
with service users’ in these 
    long-term services, of the effects that it has on the individuals 
    when 
students enter their lives and their homes for a brief time. It 
    could also be considered that high staff 
turnover has the same effect on the service 
    users’ as people are coming and going. 
    This study could 
possibly used to 
    inform the way the practice educators structure the placements that 
    happen in these 
facilities. It may be better to have longer placements for there 
    is a lower frequency of people leaving 
or have fewer students going to the long-term care settings for 
    placements.
