The gravestone of Fabia Honorata shows us a great deal of 
    information about the family that had the gravestone engraved for 
    their beloved daughter with looking at the context and inscriptions 
    that we have been given. 
This gravestone was from the ages of 43–410 CE and belonged to 
    Fabia Honorata daughter to the family 
    off the late Fabius Honoratus, tribune of the First Cohort 
    of Vangiones and Aurelia Eglectiane, the Vangiones being one of the 
    first Germanic tribes in the Roman empire which is now known as 
    modern day Germany. This shows us that the family were either 
    descendants off the Germanic 
    romans or some of those who came 
    too Britain which may suggest that 
    the daughter was a victim of war.
From what we know the gravestone was made by a mother and father 
    in memorial for their daughter and doesn’t mention any other family 
    members. This suggest that the child was the only child and first 
    born of this family so understandable took the loss pretty 
    tragically and showed by the building of the gravestone. This can 
    also indicate that perhaps the daughter wasn’t very old and only a 
    child, with no mention of a partner which was quite commonly found 
    for girls and no mention of any children it would make sense that 
    this was an unfortunate circumstance featuring the death of a young 
    girl. Taking it into account that this could possibly the death of 
    a young daughter could indicate that the death was either due to 
    illness, war or even potentially death in child birth. This is very 
    sad state of affairs but does help to identify to us that this 
    child was loved very much by her mother and father so much so that 
    in her honor they erected a grave stone to keep her in memory 
    forever. The Grave stone itself bar the engravings is plain and 
    sandstone being a very common stone throughout northern England 
    could suggest that the family was rather poor so too the size of 
    the grave. The grave was rather small in comparison to other 
    gravestones which can indicate two things, one, that the family 
    could not afford a large size of rock to construct a fully sized 
    gravestone and or two, children did tend to have smaller 
    gravestones if any which would be further evidence in suggesting 
    that the grave was one of a young girl. The gravestone being built 
    out of sandstone a highly tough rock subject to little erosion and 
    weather effects shows that the family must have really wanted to 
    preserve this memory of their daughter as a slightly more 
    affordable and obtainable e 
    material would have been limestone however this material is subject 
    to water erosion and would not still be present to this day if used 
    for the gravestone. The use of sandstone to construct the 
    gravestone was rather strange as it was not a commonly used 
    material by the Romans with materials such as concrete, stone 
    timber and marble so this can add to the evidence behind the family 
    being less off being unable to afford the more developed materials 
    being used by the romans from 
    construction etc.
We can see from the section, 
“Sacred to the spirits of the departed” 
That people of this time had strong religious beliefs and 
    believed in the notion of afterlife and that even though their 
    daughter was no longer part of the world her spirit would live on 
    in some shape or form. In Ancient Rome many people worshiped 
    spirits as gods and this could also give a double meaning to the 
    gravestone as a shrine as well as a remembrance and that their 
    daughter had become something greater than them. It was a common 
    thing for many romans of this 
    time period to have shrines in their homes and many would make 
    sacrifices to keep the spirits happy and bring good faith and 
    fortune to the family. 
Moving on to the key word, 
“tribune”
This is a term for a leader of the village or tribe a sort of 
    champion for the time and gives off how the time period and the 
    whole Roman style of life was very communalized with villages being 
    independent as such and having their own leaders within, it can 
    show that there was care for what people wanted and a means of 
    action for the romans to deliver 
    messages to and from the hierarchy. It can also show that this 
    family was important to the community so a remembrance of the 
    so-called leaders' daughter was a burden not just for the 
    family but for the whole village and area that the tribune looked 
    after. The daughters 
    grave being made by her two 
    Parents is reflective on many of the struggles experienced 
    during the time period with relatively low life 
    expectancy's; very 
    high infant mortality rates and the spread of deadly diseases which 
    would plague over cities and towns and can show deeper meaning into 
    the hardships that was all too familiar for the average family 
    through 43-410 CE.
This source is great evidence for what the time period was like 
    from43 CE to 410 CE as it is a 
    primary source made at the during the time period, it is rather 
    reliable as it was made by a Tribune who were well respected in the 
    Roman Empire. You cannot get much closer to being in an event 
    gaining an accurate example of how things were than physical 
    evidence so the grave stone acts as a great example as the carvings 
    were left undiscovered and untouched for many thousands of years 
    leading to un altered piece of 
    evidence. With this source it shows things in a rather black and 
    white fashion, with something as personal as the own Mother and 
    Father marking a grave stone for their daughter it is relatively 
    pure and original supposed to 
    looking at fancy buildings or Emperors' grave stones this can 
    give a fairly accurate presentation of family life throughout the 
    empire. I fel that a child's 
    grave is some of the most natural things with innocence and purity, 
    no glamourizing or bias that could potentially corrupt any 
    viewpoints on what society was like. Although primary sources have 
    many benefits and can be great indicators for evidence and 
    sings of what life was like during 
    this time there does also come many issues associated with these 
    and in particular this source. There are various issues that arise 
    when looking at the gravestone, one being that there is no way to 
    prove that what we are reading and seeing is all true, everyone has 
    the ability to forge things or deceive in was, although with this 
    source in particular it is not as clear the man or women making 
    this could of quite easily not been a tribune for example, these 
    things for now are too hard to prove with such little evidence. 
    Additionally, the engravings on said gravestone are written in an 
    ancient text which when translating there could be many 
    misinterpretations when deciphering what this ancient language 
    translate too in modern languages as 
    we know today. The gravestone itself is made of stone and stone 
    overtime erodes and changes with engravings starting to disappear 
    or even parts getting faded out overtime, especially when looking 
    at ancient artifacts there is a good chance that what we have 
    discovered or reading is perhaps only part of the story. With 
    primary sources it's all about interpretations, for example 
    with the gravestone there is many phrases or features on the 
    artifact that can be delivered in many varying ways leaving the 
    correct answer unknown and all down to what historians have decided 
    is the meaning be it correct or incorrect it is impossible to tell 
    one hundred percent leaving all theories and interpretations into 
    question. To find a more accurate representation of life it would 
    be conducive to cross reference with other sources to find matches 
    or differences in order to figure out the hidden truth amongst all 
    varying displays of evidence. 

