Community Profile- Maryhill
Maryhill is located in the council region of Glasgow North. 
    Spread over the 7 miles along Maryhill Road, including areas such 
    as Gairbraid, Maryhill Park, North Kelvinside and several more. 
    There is a total population of 13,074 in the Maryhill Road corridor 
    and 11,735 in North Maryhill and Summerston (Shipton & Whyte , 
    2011). In the late 1700s and early 1800s the canal was built in 
    Maryhill, this included several dry docks and other waterways. This 
    enabled an increase in employment in the area in the shipbuilding 
    industry and so increasing in the local population. This lead to 
    Maryhill to become a Police Burgh in 1856. Following the building 
    of the railway there was the introduction of brewing, glass, timber 
    and rubber manufactureWith the increase in 
    prosperity in the areamore leisure time activities 
    were introduced and hence the introduction of a football team 
    (Black, Second CIty of the Empire, 2004). In the 21st century 
    employment has changed and moved away from industrial and 
    manufacturing jobs to the service industry. As of April 2012, 7.5% 
    of working age people in Maryhill were claiming Job Seekers 
    Allowance and National Insurance Credits. This was the highest rate 
    in Scotland (Liddell, 2012). This statistic may not reflect the 
    level of unemployment in Maryhill during that period as it had only 
    taken into account the level of people on JSA and NIC, not how many 
    people were receiving Disability Living Allowance (now known as 
    Personal Independence Payments) and other benefits which would mean 
    they were not in employment.
The Scottish Index of Multiple Deprivation shows Maryhill to be 
    in the 1st decile of deprivation overall (see appendix 1-3). There 
    are 3-5 areas on the map that can be considered to be in the 
    Maryhill area. There are separate areas of deprivation considered 
    in the overall calculation and individually these include: income, 
    employment, health, educations/skills, housing, geographic access 
    and crime. For all except the geographical area Maryhill is in the 
    first decile, including housing (Crown, 2012). The housing domain 
    is described as “person in households which are 
    over-crowded” and “persons in households without 
    central heating” (National Statistics, 2012). Housing is 
    considered to be on the third level of the Dahlgren and Whitehead 
    model in the structural factors section (Whitehead, Dahlgren, & 
    Gilson, 2001). Housing as a factor can have a profound impact on an 
    individual’s quality of life, from the area that they live in, to 
    the type of housing they are living in.
Housing is especially important to older adults, specifically 
    those who are aged 65 and over. This age group make up 11.5% of the 
    population of Maryhill Rd Corridor and 7.1% of the North Maryhill 
    and Summerston area (Glasgow Centre for Population Health , 2016). 
    Within these areas, a large proportion of the accommodations 
    available are not suitable for people who have limited mobility. 
    The properties are predominantly flats and many of which do not 
    have lifts, and cannot accommodate chairs lifts. This can mean that 
    many older people find it very challenging to leave their flats or 
    may be unable to leave at all. For those completely unable to leave 
    their flats it can lead to isolation and often depression, this 
    will increase the pressure on District Nurses and local health care 
    practices. It will often mean that if family cannot assist in the 
    care of the older person then carers will have to be brought in to 
    assist with shopping and other activities of daily living. Living 
    circumstances and poverty are one of the five factors said to 
    affect a person’s mental health, the others are: discrimination, 
    relationships, physical health and participation in meaningful 
    activities (Mental Health Foundation, 2016). Living in a flat with 
    limited access to the outside world could be considered in several 
    of these factors, the main one being poverty. If the person did not 
    live in poverty, then there would be a greater opportunity to 
    change their living circumstances. When it is also considered that 
    they are unable to leave their flat then they would be unable to 
    participate in “meaningful life activities”. 
    Factoring in all of these parts it was not surprising that the 
    level of mental health illness is as high as it is in the older 
    adult, 22% of men and 28% of women aged 65 and over have depression 
    (Mental Health Foundation, 2016).
In Maryhill, the availability of affordable and healthy food can 
    also be limited in some areas. There is a large supermarket on 
    Maryhill Rd with good access by local buses but this is not 
    accessible to people who cannot travel there. That leaves people 
    having to shop at whatever is local to where they live and those 
    shops are often more expensive and do not stock fresh fruit and 
    vegetables. This can mean that people become malnourished very 
    easily. This is especially important in the older adult as they are 
    more prone to self-neglect.
The Council has put several projects in place in order to help 
    combat the type of housing available in Maryhill. The project was 
    started in 2010 and is ongoing. The redevelopment includes two 
    phases of development, the first stage has been completed and there 
    are 35 new homes, with the second phase still being completed with 
    over 100 new homes being developed (Glasgow City Council, 2016). 
    The new accommodation will hopefully tackle some of the issues with 
    the current housing such as the lack of disabled access. New 
    building regulations will mean that the doorways in the houses will 
    have to be a minimum width which allows the accommodation of 
    wheelchairs (HM Government, 2015). Although the type of housing 
    will be improved there are no plans to change the local shops, 
    which will mean that although there is some improvement in living 
    conditions older people with limited mobility will still be unable 
    to access fresh fruit and vegetables without outside help from 
    family or carers.
For people, able to get out of their house but unable to walk to 
    bus stops or drive themselves they are able to access the local 
    dial-a-bus service, run by Strathclyde Passenger Transport (SPT). 
    This bus was charged at the same rate as the local bus service but 
    will pick people up from their house and drop them off as close to 
    their desired destination as possible. In the same way that public 
    buses are free for people with a Scottish Citizen’s National 
    Entitlement Card so was the dial-a-bus (Transport, 2016). The 
    service provides a great help to older adults who were previously 
    unable to get out in the community before this service. Although 
    the service does help to get people to doctors’ appointments and to 
    the shops out with their local area it does not help people who are 
    unable to climb the stairs to get out of their own flats.
The role of the nurse with the older adult has a very broad 
    application, and is no longer just concerned with the physical 
    ailments of their patients, although this is still a large part of 
    the role. In the situation of people being unable to climb the 
    stairs up and down to their flat then the nurse would have to judge 
    whether it is appropriate to refer the patient to Occupational 
    Therapy and if that is not the case ensuring that social work is 
    involved to make sure that the patients get the care package 
    appropriate for their specific needs. Healthy eating promotion is 
    also part of a nurses’ role and where appropriate the nurse can 
    advise on the best things for the older person to be eating and 
    should be actively encouraging the older person to eat. Older 
    people have been shown to have reduced appetite which means that it 
    is very important for a nurse to promote eating to the older 
    patients, nutrition is a key element in the overall health of a 
    person (Crawley & Hocking, 2011).
From the experience, I have had in Maryhill and the literature I 
    have read the current provision of services is not meeting the 
    needs of the older people within the Maryhill Community. There are 
    people who are unable to leave their own homes due to the structure 
    of the building they live in and there is currently no provision of 
    housing for them to transfer to somewhere more suitable. Adding to 
    this they are unable to get out to see people or to access local 
    leisure groups or elderly services within the community. With 
    regards to the nutrition of the older adult the local shops are 
    lacking and carers coming in to cook food often are not providing 
    healthy nutritious meals, they are often microwave or ready meals 
    which do not contain fresh fruit and vegetables. There is room for 
    improvement in Maryhill but without the relevant funding and time 
    this will not be able to be tackled. District nurses do a very good 
    job with the time and funds they have available but without help 
    from the government then progress will not be made.

Appendix
Appendix 1.0-

Appendix 2.0-

Appendix 3.0-


