Effective science communication: Key factors and 
    considerations
In the age where essentially all information, knowledge, 
    opinions, half-truths and lies are available on demand, boundaries 
    blurred and indistinct in the black box of data; getting a 
    pertinent message across to the public poses a difficult task. This 
    complex world for science communication is set amongst a backdrop 
    of mass media, funding bodies, institutional and individual 
    reputation. Despite this public interest in science remains high, 
    with more than half of people in the UK feeling that they are not 
    subjected to enough scientific information.1 
    In order to maintain this desire to learn more about science and to 
    satisfy the interest of the public, appraisal of the key factors 
    and considerations in partaking effective science communication is 
    vital. In doing so, this will ensure that a new generation of 
    science communicators may adapt appropriately to engage their 
    audiences providing a multitude of benefits for scientist and 
    public alike. This essay will discuss science communication broadly 
    but with a particular focus on the following themes: audience, 
    evaluation, medium and topic. 
Before undertaking any science communication task, an audience 
    will either be selected or assigned. Once this has occurred the 
    demographics can be looked at to help pitch science at an 
    appropriate level which both attracts interest and is able to be 
    understood by the audience. Age, social background, current 
    understanding and interest in the topic are important 
    considerations.2 If the discussion is too 
    complex, the audience may lose interest as they are unable to 
    follow. Equally, they may lose interest if the information they are 
    given feels basic or is reiterating pre-existing knowledge.  
Whilst undertaking my science communication task, I noticed the 
    audience was relatively homogenous, as they were all studying the 
    same curriculum at school. Yet there was obvious variation in 
    general background knowledge, attention span and interest. To 
    overcome this, the presenter offered opportunities for the children 
    to ask for help in doing tasks, giving further explanation as 
    needed, as well as taking regular breaks and utilising different 
    teaching styles to maintain enthusiasm and interest. I was 
    particularly struck by the difference in interest in allowing the 
    children to see their own DNA on gel electrophoresis, as opposed to 
    one pre-prepared or on a screen. Not only did this further engage 
    them in their curriculum it allowed them to ‘see’ science and 
    hopefully create a memorable moment encouraging them to further 
    explore science. This programme had a limited number of 
    participants partly due to the expense and availability of 
    equipment, however it was repeated throughout the year. The ability 
    to scale to a different audience size, or to facilitate the 
    presentation to take place in a different physical setting, allows 
    for a greater audience potential, although it does limit the 
    equipment that can be used. Choosing props, models, displays and 
    computer-based presentations, which are mobile and require little 
    set up, can help alleviate this as well as cater to a variety of 
    learning styles. 
Science communicators, and the projects they run, can be funded 
    by a variety of sources. Many are employed by media to publish 
    articles, videos or segments. Others work for higher education 
    institutions and charities to provide a direct link between 
    researchers and the public. Less formal science communication 
    occurs when academics give inaugural lectures or offer open days to 
    the general public, although without formal training the quality of 
    such events can vary significantly. Whilst the frequency of such 
    events used to be low, due to the Wolfendale committee recognising 
    the importance of effective science communication-and subsequently 
    research councils putting clauses into funding packages stipulating 
    public engagement must be undertaken- it is now 
    increasing.3 It is hoped that this will have a 
    long term impact by increasing public engagement and dialogue with 
    scientists. Currently most funding has been shown to be for 
    ‘educating the public’ style engagement, lacking in 
    dialogue.4 Effectiveness of science 
    communication, through direct feedback from participants, is 
    essential for securing funding and ensuring the presentation is as 
    effective and engaging as possible. The use of both qualitative and 
    quantitative data can be used to this effect, with both providing 
    valuable information.  
Distance methods of science communication, such as those done 
    through mass or social media, do not involve direct dialogue 
    between science communicators and their audience. Though this 
    increases the potential audience size, it poses a problem in 
    ascertaining who the audience is. Focus groups and feedback on 
    previous presentations can be used to help mitigate this, although 
    it can prove time consuming and expensive. Science blogs, 
    categorised by producing a minimum of 50% scientific content, are 
    an example of an accessible online medium with a large 
    audience.5 However, these resources are 
    generally utilised by older, wealthy and English speaking 
    individuals, suggesting more needs to be done to widen appeal to 
    low participation groups.6 Website design has 
    been shown to increase engagement and enhances the reader’s ability 
    to retain understand and interpret the information 
    given.7 Increased exposure of blogs and videos 
    on platforms typically used by younger audiences, such as social 
    media, could further increase their appeal and impact.  
When it is up to the presenter to decide what medium to engage 
    an audience with they must consider their own personal presentation 
    style, the availability of props and technology and how in depth 
    they are planning on communicating the science. Failure to choose 
    the correct medium may result in the audience misinterpreting the 
    science or losing interest in the topic. For example, power point 
    presentations are more appropriate for shorter time periods which 
    require in depth science communication whereas day long science 
    fairs will most likely rely on interactive props and models 
    accompanied by text. The presenter’s style of engagement will also 
    vary when interacting with different audiences and topics. For 
    young children learning basic biology their pitch and tone will be 
    different compared to communicating the same science to older 
    children and adults.  
Gatekeeping theory, broadly defined as how many billions of 
    messages that are available in the world get cut down and 
    transformed into the hundreds that reach a person each day, has 
    been applied to topic choice in communicating 
    science.8 It found that the communicator’s 
    personal interest, being a neutral provider at the individual 
    level, the potential impact and public appetite for their work, are 
    all important factors for them in deciding a topic. To avoid 
    controversy presenting topics, the presenter needs to understand 
    the potential viewpoints which may be encountered and approach 
    topics in a broad and balanced manner, offering an unbiased 
    perspective and avoiding particularly emotive 
    language.9 If the science communicator fails 
    to remain unbiased it has the potential to mislead the audience and 
    poses moral issues as those who are unfamiliar with the topic may 
    assume the accuracy of the information given. However, apprehension 
    that science communicators experience in presenting these topics 
    may cause them to exaggerate the response from the audience. It has 
    been shown that science communicators may over-
    estimated the negative reaction 
    received from audiences and so clear and accurate terminology 
    should be upheld.9 Examples of topics which 
    have the potential to cause controversy include embryonic stem cell 
    use or animal testing and as such these topics should be handled 
    with caution. Niches audiences, such as suffers of conditions which 
    are being discussed, can also prove a challenging task.  
 
