TODO
A mission statement is an organisation - written statement that 
    outlines the basic fundamental purpose of the organisation. In 
    general it gives the definition of a company or organisations 
    operations and scope and sets to set it apart from similar 
    organisations. It says why the organisation exists..

“Organisations have general and specific goals... They 
    have goals regarding development, growth and investment in long 
    term viability.” (Funrham, 2005, p.759)All 
    of these goals can be summarised into one large goal – the mission 
    statement. It might say what the company aims to achieve, how it 
    treats its customers or what technologies it uses.

They can take the form of sentences, long or short, phrases, 
    bullet points or paragraphs. The mission statement might be based 
    on the strategy – what it is the organisation wants to do – and 
    strategy – how it is going to do it. It could include the 
    aspirations, values, future plans and be inspiring, bold, ambitious 
    and easy to understand. There are no set criteria for the design of 
    the mission statement other than that it should be positive and 
    promote the organisation.

A mission statements can be 
    found framed on the walls of an organisations 
    buildings or on their website, 
    and can also be named as the vision statement, core values and 
    guiding principles to name just a few.

The mission statement can be designed for communication to the 
    public, stakeholders, shareholders, customers and employees.

According to Pinto and Prescott (1987) in a study of more than 
    400 teams: “a clearly stated mission was the only factor 
    which predicted success at all stages of the innovative 
    process,” (West, 2001, p.280) hence it is a 
    very important feature of any organisation and should be well 
    designed.

In this essay four assignment questions will be 
    looked at in an analysis of different aspects of the use and 
    performance of mission statements. Also ten different real mission 
    statements will be acquired.


Question 1: Why do companies have mission 
    statements?
There are many reasons and benefits to be had from having a 
    mission statement. Put simply, they are very important. According 
    to Bain and Company, in a survey of five hundred firms, 90% used a 
    mission statement in the preceding five years so they are widely 
    used. They are “usually considered the cornerstone of every 
    company’s strategy formulation exercise.” (Bart, 1997, 
    p.9) The effectiveness of a mission statement 
    depends on whether it can inspire and motivate employees and guide 
    organisation efforts in a consistent manner and direction. Thus it 
    gives the organisation a sense of purpose.

Naturally there is the potential that high level 
    managers are not able to agree on where the organisation should be 
    going. This causes confusion and distractions in the workplace and 
    therefore threatens productivity. A well designed mission statement 
    will prevent this happening. It gives everyone a clear, common goal 
    to work towards. They can be thought of as the “pivotal 
    starting point for effectively wielding almost every new management 
    program and initiative.” (Bart, 1997, p.9) 
    They have great influence on the way work is carried out in an 
    organisation. Mission statements “form the only solid 
    foundation upon which any corporate program can rest if it is to 
    endure for the long term.” (Bart, 1997, p.9-10) It is a very important organisation document that all employees 
    should be able to look to for purpose in their employment. It also 
    states the purpose of the organisation in the long run.

Mission statements also “ensure that the interests of key 
    stakeholders are not ignored.” (Bart, 1997, 
    p.10) Obviously this is important, 
    however it is important that organisations do not solely focus on 
    stakeholders and neglect their customers – after all if they wanted 
    to they could go elsewhere meaning that the organisation could not 
    survive.

Mission statements “sharpen a firm’s business 
    focus.” (Bart, 1997, p.10) No firm can do 
    everything well all the time – it cannot serve every market to the 
    highest standards thus it must be refined down to the primary 
    functions it set out to carry out to its customers and stakeholders 
    etc. The mission statement constantly reminds the organisation of 
    this so they do not drift away from their main reason for 
    existence. If boundaries on the movements of the organisation are 
    not set then focus is lost and performance potentially 
    decreases.

Another reason organisations use mission statements is that they 
    “enable better control over employees.” (Bart, 1997, 
    p.10) If an employee can relate to a mission 
    statement, then he or she may be more induced to control their 
    behaviour at work and conform to rules.

“They promote shared values and behavioural 
    standards.” (Bart, 1997, p.11) Mission 
    statements give a strong sense of identity to the employees that do 
    conform to the values of the organisation. Obviously this means 
    positive results for the company through the likes of better 
    teamwork and work ethic. Those that do not conform tend to leave 
    the organisation through choice.

Most people in life are searching for some sort of meaning. 
    According to Campbell (1989, p.4) “if organisations can 
    provide meaning for an employee on top of pay and conditions, it 
    will inspire greater commitment and loyalty.” If an organisation is to do well one thing it certainly needs is 
    employees that are committed and willing to stay for a long time. 
    If the mission statement relates personally to the employee then it 
    has more of a benefit.

“Organisations with clear values find it easier to 
    select, recruit, promote and develop the right kind of 
    people.” (Campbell, 1989, p.4) Therefore by 
    stating missions and aims, it lets the employees know the kinds of 
    people that the organisation is looking for and means that people 
    that do not fit the criteria will know about it, and are less 
    likely to apply for a position or stay in the position if they have 
    it, meaning time and effort is saved for the organisation.

Mission statements also promote better cooperation and trust – 
    “organisations with a sense of mission find it easier to 
    work together, to respect each other and to search for the solution 
    that is in the best interest of the organisation.” 
    (Campbell, 1989, p.5). If everyone feels they are part of the same 
    team working towards the same goal, they are far more likely to be 
    willing to help each other out and there is also the camaraderie 
    aspect to it.

It has been shown that there are many strong reasons in support 
    of organisations having mission statements. Most of these reasons 
    seem to be for the benefit of managers and employees in the 
    organisation rather than for customers that would be using the 
    products or services.


Question 2: How similar or different are company 
    mission statements?
Ten organisation’s mission statements were acquired from their 
    websites. (See Appendix) These mission statements 
    could sometimes be seen under the of vision statement also. The two 
    terms have quite similar meaning. These organisations included 
    Harley Davidson, Michelin, Virgin Atlantic, Microsoft, Coca Cola, 
    University of Glasgow and more.

A template was used to outline the difference or similarities in 
    the mission statements by meanings of checking for different 
    components, for example, whether the mission statement mentioned 
    its reason for existence, its technology and concern for 
    employees.

The mission statements varied a lot in length from short 
    sentences to small paragraphs. On the whole the content of the 
    mission statements varied quite a lot. All the organisations showed 
    reason for existence, for example, the BBC’s mission statement is 
    “To enrich people’s lives with programmes and services that 
    inform, educate and entertain.” This has a 
    clear purpose in it – to enrich people’s lives. Microsoft’s is 
    “At Microsoft our mission and values are to help people and 
    businesses throughout the world realize their full 
    potential.” Again there is a clear purpose, 
    a reason for existence – to help businesses perform to their full 
    potential.

The following components were included in four out of ten of the 
    mission statements – principal product or service being mentioned; 
    geographic domain; customers and markets; desired public image; way 
    of life/having an effect on people’s lives and finally benefits to 
    general society. The University of Glasgow has the following 
    mission statement: “To undertake world-leading research and 
    to provide an intellectually stimulating learning environment, thus 
    delivering benefits to culture, society and the 
    economy.” This clearly shows its benefits to 
    society, and the principal services it provides – providing an 
    intellectually stimulating learning environment.

The following components were included in three out of ten of 
    the mission statements – company philosophy; company self concept 
    and concern for employees. For example Michelin’s statement is: 
    “...to enhance mobility by putting into practice its core 
    values of respect for customers, respect for people, respect for 
    shareholders, respect for the environment and respect for 
    facts.” It shows Michelin’s philosophy – the 
    value of respect it has for everyone, and it concern for employees 
    encompassed by its respect for everyone.

The following components were included in two or less of the ten 
    mission statements: aspirational vision; distinguishing itself from 
    others; location; how the product or service is provided; 
    technology and concern for firm survival. Location and how the 
    product or service is provided did not appear at all in any of the 
    mission statements.

Hence it can de deduced that components of 
    mission statements vary significantly from organisation to 
    organisation. There did not appear to be any obvious trends for 
    inclusion of components from statement to statement. Of the sixteen 
    trends looked at most mission statements appeared to include around 
    four or five.


Question 3: How effective are company mission 
    statements in achieving company goals?
Mission statements on the whole, if well written are effective 
    in achieving high performance or company goals – “mission 
    statements - from their pre development rationale to their post 
    development alignment with employee behaviours – have a positive 
    association with performance and make a positive contribution 
    towards it.” (Bart, Bontis and Taggar, 2001, 
    p.32) Mission statements must have proper reasoning, 
    quality content, be focussed and influence behavioural change in 
    the right direction to be effective.

It is well understood that mission statements are 
    “supposed to harness employee’s energies and focus company 
    resources.” (Bart, Bontis and Taggar, 2001, 
    p.33) However the employee must understand and have 
    a sense of the mission so he can execute it with passion. 
    Thus the employer must “manage their mission 
    wisely” to get the highest performance and achieve the 
    goals.

If an employee is not satisfied with the mission then he will 
    not commit as much to it – “The degree of satisfaction with 
    a mission will positively affect the degree of employee commitment 
    to it.” (Bart, Bontis and Taggar, 2001, p.33) If the employee likes the mission statement, can relate to it, 
    or approves of it in general, then by committing to it he will work 
    hard and more specifically towards the goals which promotes the 
    success of the organisation.

In addition “The degree of employee commitment to a 
    mission will positively affect degree the to which employee 
    behaviour is influenced by that mission.” (Bart, Bontis and 
    Taggar, 2001, p.33)
So if the employee is satisfied by the mission, he is committed 
    to it and therefore his behaviour is influenced it, ideally.

Mission statements must influence employee behaviour to 
    positively affect firm performance – “The degree to which a 
    mission influences employee behaviour will positively affect firm 
    performance.” (Bart, Bontis and Taggar, 2001, 
    p.33) Employee behaviour has a significant and 
    positive effect on performance and therefore goals.

Also it was found that “more successful firms are likely 
    to mention the stakeholder groups “employees” and “society” and the 
    component “values”” (Bartkus, Glassman and McAfee, 2000, 
    p.91) and “components that were not significantly related to 
    performance were financial objectives, industry, geographic scope, 
    core competency, future orientation and motivational 
    phrases.” (Bartkus, Glassman and McAfee, 2000, 
    p.92)

In summary, if a mission statement can please or satisfy one of 
    its employees this will have a positive effect on the achieving of 
    goals in the organisation. Certain components should be included in 
    mission statements to promote the achieving of goals and certain 
    components are best left out if possible.


Question 4: How would you advise companies to change 
    their mission statements in order to improve them?
There are certain mission statement components that appear to 
    have greater effect on employee behaviour than others. As we know 
    employee behaviour is the key to achieving goals and as high 
    performance as possible.

Managers should, when changing or developing their mission 
    statements, give as deep thought as possible to develop them to the 
    best standard and way they can. They should pay “close 
    attention to the motives which drive their mission statements in 
    the first place.” (Bart, 1997, p.382)

To get the full advantage of their employee’s behaviour benefits 
    managers need to “be much more aggressive and explicit with 
    their mission rationales up front.” (Bart, 1997, 
    p.382) They should be direct and to the point.

“Effective mission statements yield general indicators 
    regarding what an organisation intends to be, whom it intends to 
    serve and the philosophies and values that will guide its strategic 
    and operational design making processes.” (Ireland and 
    Hitt, 1992, p.40) Organisations should follow these 
    guidelines in an attempt to improve their mission statements. They 
    should not include unnecessary information.

Customers can be considered to be the most important stakeholder 
    and “therefore should play a prominent role in the mission 
    statement’s focus.” (Ireland and Hitt, 1992, 
    p.41) Managers should write mission statements that 
    relate and apply to what the customer wants or needs, and wants to 
    read.

According to Bart (1997, p.14) a lot of mission statements do 
    not work how they ought to – “Most of these mission 
    statements appear to be more hype and hysteria than real beliefs , 
    philosophies and attitudes...” Organisations 
    should not get to carried away when 
    writing mission statements and remain concise and stick to the 
    point.

Also, “managers would do well to avoid cluttering their 
    mission statements with any more components than 
    necessary.” (Bart, 1997, p.15) There are 
    certain components, highlighted in Question 3 that 
    are sometimes best left out. These generally include financial 
    objectives, industry, geographic scope, core competency, future 
    orientation and motivational phrases.

In summary, managers and organisations should aim to be direct 
    and state what their unique purpose is. They should address the 
    customer when possible. They should aim to avoid creating too much 
    hype in their mission statement and avoid the certain components 
    highlighted.

Appendix
Organisation mission statements (or vision) used:

Harley Davidson (Motorcycles): “We fulfil dreams inspired 
    by the many roads of the world by providing extraordinary 
    motorcycles and customer experiences. We fuel the passion for 
    freedom in our customers to express their own 
    individuality.”
http://www.harley-davidson.com/en_GB/Content/Pages/Company/company.html?locale=en_GB&bmLocale=en_GB

Ford (Automobiles): “we are a globally diverse family, 
    with a proud heritage, that’s passionately committed to providing 
    outstanding products and services.”
http://www.ford.co.uk/AboutFord/CompanyInformation

Iveco (Transport vehicles): "To offer solutions for 
    the transport industry based on our outstanding competence, 
    together with our partners all over the world.”
http://web.iveco.com/uk/company/pages/iveco-values-vision-mission-values.aspx

Michelin (Tyres): “Michelin’s mission is to enhance 
    mobility by putting into practice its core values of respect for 
    customers, respect for people, respect for shareholders, respect 
    for the environment and respect for facts.”
http://www.michelin.co.uk/about/michelin-worldwide

Virgin Atlantic (Airline): “Our mission: At Virgin 
    Atlantic our mission is simple
Mission 1: To grow a profitable airline...
Mission 2: Where people love to fly...
Mission 3: And where people love to work.”
http://www.virgin-atlantic.com/en/us/allaboutus/missionstatement/index.jsp

BBC (Broadcaster): “To enrich people's lives with 
    programmes and services that inform, educate and 
    entertain.”
http://www.bbc.co.uk/aboutthebbc/insidethebbc/whoweare/mission_and_values/

Microsoft (Computing): “At Microsoft our mission and 
    values are to help people and businesses throughout the world 
    realize their full potential”
http://www.microsoft.com/about/en/us/default.aspx

Tesco (Retailer): “Our vision is for Tesco to be most 
    highly valued by the customers we serve, the communities in which 
    we operate, our loyal and committed staff and our shareholders; to 
    be a growth company; a modern and innovative company and winning 
    locally, applying our skills globally.”
http://www.tescoplc.com/about-tesco/our-vision/

Coca-Cola (Drinks): “Our mission is:
• To refresh the world - in mind, body and 
    spirit
• To inspire moments of optimism - through our brands and 
    actions
• To create value and make a difference everywhere we 
    engage”
http://www.coca-cola.co.uk/about-us/coca-cola-mission-vision-statement.html


University of Glasgow (Education):to 
    undertake world-leading research and to provide an intellectually 
    stimulating learning environment, thus delivering benefits to 
    culture, society and the economy.”
http://www.gla.ac.uk/about/values/

The components that were used in the mission statement 
    comparison were: Reason for existence; Principal products and 
    services provided; Aspirational vision; Distinguish itself from 
    others; Location; Geographic domain; Customers and markets; How 
    product or service is provided; Technology; Concern for survival; 
    Company philosophy; Company self concept; Desired public image; 
    Concern for employees; Way of life/effect on peoples life; Benefits 
    to general society.


