What role does photography play in the (re)construction of 
    Maron’s ‘Familiengeschichte’, 
    Pawels Briefe?
Photography, since its conception, has played a key role in 
    family narratives and family identities. Even before photography 
    became widespread with the invention of the Kodak camera, 
    1Marianne Hirsch, Family 
    Frames: Photography, Narrative and Postmemory, Cambridge MA: 
    Harvard University Press, 1997, p. 6.  formal family 
    photographs were taken and passed from generation to generation, 
    thus becoming an integral part of the way we remember, and the way 
    we view our identity within the family. Hirsch introduces a concept 
    she refers to as postmemory: 
‘Postmemory describes the relationship of the second 
    generation to powerful, often traumatic, experiences that preceded 
    their births but that were nevertheless ruthlessly transmitted to 
    them so deeply as to seem to constitute memories in their own 
    right.’ 2Marianne Hirsch, 
    ‘The Generation of Postmemory’, Poetics Today, Vol. 29 No.1: 
    103-129, (p. 103).
For Hirsch, photographs are one of the most important media 
    through which postmemory asserts itself: ‘Holocaust photographs are 
    the fragmentary remnants that shape the cultural work of 
    postmemory’. 3Ibid, p. 
    103.
In Pawels Briefe photographs are one of the 
    main means through which Maron attempts to reconstruct the story of 
    her family, beginning with the lives of her maternal grandparents 
    Pawel and Josefa Iglarz. Because Maron never met her grandparents, 
    in order to do this she relies on sources external to her own 
    memories. Throughout the text she draws her information from her 
    mother’s memories; some historical documents such as her 
    grandfather Pawel’s birth certificate; letters between Pawel and 
    his children from his time in the ghetto Belchatow and also family 
    photographs. This essay will deal with the role that photography 
    plays throughout the book, discussing first the way photographs and 
    their accompanying imagetexts 
    4Term taken from W.J.T. 
    Mitchell in Hirsch,1997, p. 3. are used, and then 
    discussing the relationship between photography and memory.
Within the text itself, photographs appear in the top left hand 
    corner of a double page spread, and then are frequently repeated 
    zoomed in or enlarged following a page turn, in the bottom right 
    hand corner of the next page (the first example of this layout 
    being on p26 and 
    p29). This gap between photographs 
    means that the reader, on coming to the second one, must turn back 
    to the first and look at it again. This brings to mind the idea 
    that ‘in order to see a photograph well, it is best to look away or 
    close your eyes’ 5Roland Barthes, 
    Camera Lucida: Reflections on Photography, 
    London: Vintage 1993, p. 53.. This page turn gives 
    the reader a moment to ‘look away’, and then be presented with the 
    photograph again, to view it with fresh eyes. As such, the 
    photographs have a greater impact on the reader: we are forced to 
    look at them much more closely than we otherwise would. This layout 
    shows that the photographs in Pawels Briefe have 
    more than an illustrative function: they are a source from which 
    Maron seeks to draw information about her family and about 
    herself.
By presenting some of the photographs enlarged, Maron draws the 
    reader’s attention to the details which she herself finds most 
    interesting or most moving, or which she considers to be of 
    particular significance. Sometimes, such as is the case with the 
    studio photograph that was taken when the family planned to move to 
    America, this is stated explicitly. Maron writes: ‘
    Dieses Foto habe ich schon als 
    Kind geliebt, wahrscheinlich weil meine Mutter, die darauf erst 
    fünf oder sechs Jahre alt ist, so hübsch wenn auch so deutlich 
    misslaunig aussieht’ (p.46). Sure enough, we later 
    see the picture enlarged to show just Hella’s face. Sometimes, 
    however, it is less explicit and the reader must construe for 
    themself what Maron sees. An example of this is the photograph of 
    Hella at the Kreisparteischule (p.174). Here, 
    the enlarged photograph not only serves the function of showing the 
    reader people behind Hella and most particularly the communist flag 
    in the background. In this one photograph, we see the 
    mother-daughter conflict that is one of the themes in the text: 
    Maron finds it hard to forgive her mother for believing so utterly 
    in communism. Thus in the enlarged picture (p.179), the reader sees 
    what Maron sees (her mother sitting smiling, beneath the communist 
    flag) although our attention is not drawn to this detail in the 
    imagetext. In this, we see that photography in the text is 
    manipulated to show the reader Maron’s own viewpoint, both 
    explicitly and implicitly.
More often than not, the photographs in the text are accompanied 
    by a section in which they are contextualised or described by 
    Maron: an imagetext. By doing this, she involves the reader further 
    in the narrative. Discussing the Winter Garden Photograph in 
    Barthes, Hirsch writes:
‘Barthes cannot show us the photograph because we stand 
    outside the familial network of looks and thus cannot see the 
    picture in the way that Barthes must. To us it would be just 
    another generic family photograph from a long time ago.’
In the same way, in order to prevent us from dismissing the 
    photographs as merely ‘just another generic family photograph’ or 
    even as simply a historical source, in her imagetexts Maron forces 
    the reader to view the pictures through her eyes, and dwell on them 
    as would be done if the people within them were known to the 
    reader. To use terminology from Barthes, we can see the Studium 
    (‘it is by the Studium that I am interested in so many photographs, 
    whether I receive them as political testimony or enjoy them as 
    good, historical sources’ 
    6Barthes, 1993, p. 
    26.) of the photographs easily enough, and appreciate 
    them for what they are, and Maron draws our attention to what is, 
    for her, the Punctum (‘this is the element which rises from the 
    scene, shoots out of it like and arrow and pierces me’ 
    7Ibid.), by 
    enlarging or cropping the photographs and showing them again a page 
    later. Thus, through the layout and the imagetexts, Maron allows 
    the reader to see her family photographs as she sees them, and 
    therefore gives them extra significance, not just as historical 
    sources and inspiration for her story, but as forming parts of the 
    narrative in their own right.
In spite of the fact that photographs are one of the key 
    historical sources used in the text, they are on several occasions 
    shown to be somewhat unreliable. In an interview quoted by Byrnes, 
    Maron says: ‘Ich wollte das 
    Erinnern als etwas Vages, Unvollständiges, Verändbares 
    vorführen.’ 
    8Deidre Byrnes, ‘Exposing the 
    Gaps in Memory: Forgetting and Remembering in Monika Maron’s Pawels 
    Briefe’ in Rereading Monika Maron: Text, Counter-Text and 
    Context, Bern: Peter Lang, (2011), 117-48, p. 
    142. Through this means, even the photographs we see 
    become filled with uncertainty. Barthes refers to photographs as 
    being evidential: they show ‘what has been’ (
    ça a été) 
    9Barthes, 1993, p. 
    85.. In a sense, not all of the photographs used in 
    the text bear much weight as sources: they are shown by Maron to be 
    as subjective and unreliable as memory itself, and do not always 
    enhance the factual nature of the story that Maron chooses to tell. 
    According to Barthes, ‘photography never lies: or rather, it can 
    lie as to the meaning of the thing, being by nature tendentious, 
    never as to its existence. […] Every photograph is a certificate of 
    presence.’ 10Ibid, p. 
    87. Just because a photograph shows a moment in time, 
    it does not mean that it shows any more than this, and any other 
    reading must come from the viewer themselves 
    11Ibid, p. 20.. 
    When Maron moves from talking about what the photograph actually 
    shows to hypothesising about the way the people in them were 
    feeling at the time and what they were thinking about, we see that 
    photography, as a means of recapturing the past, has fallen short. 
    Of Josefa in the photograph captioned ‘Pawel und Josefa in Kurow’ 
    (p.96), Maron writes:
‘Weint sie? Oder betet sie? 
    Fragt sie ihren Gott, womit sie diese Strafe verdient hat? 
    Flackert, vielleicht, nur für einen einzigen kurzen Augenblick, der 
    Gedanke auf, daß es vielleicht doch eine Sünde war, einen Juden zu 
    heiraten?’ (p.97).
Here, it is shown that the photograph reveals at once a lot and 
    very little. We can see, literally, Pawel and Josefa sitting side 
    by side in the sun, Josefa holding flowers and Pawel’s arm around 
    her, but anything further than this is imposed on the photograph by 
    the viewer (whether the viewer is Maron, or the reader). The effect 
    of these imagetexts on the reader can be described by Hirsch 
    thus:
‘Writing the image accomplishes even more in this scene of 
    mourning: it undoes the objectification of the still photograph and 
    thereby takes it out of the realm of stasis, immobility, 
    mortification […] into fluidity, movement and thus, finally, life.’ 
    12Hirsch, 1997, p. 
    3-4.
Maron seeks to bring her grandparents to life, not just for the 
    reader, but also for herself, through these imagetexts in which she 
    describes more than can possibly be read from a mere photograph.
The interplay between forgetting and remembering plays a very 
    important role throughout the text. Sometimes, Maron uses 
    photographs as testimony to fact, as can be seen in the language 
    she uses to refer to them. The photograph taken prior to the 
    family’s planned migration to America is introduced thus:  ‘
    Einziges Zeugnis dieses 
    ungeheuren Vorhabens, […], ist ein Familienfoto’ 
    (p.45). The photo here is described as proof or testimony for 
    something that actually happened, backing up Hella’s memories. 
    Photography, however, is not always portrayed as being so reliable 
    as fact, or so connected to memory. For example, Maron discusses a 
    photograph showing Pawel’s father, her great-grand father, reading 
    a book, when according to Pawel’s birth certificate he was in fact 
    illiterate. The description, or imagetext, comes a page later than 
    the photograph itself, so that it comes as something of a surprise 
    to the reader that the man who looks so learned was in fact 
    illiterate. In this instance, what the photograph shows is 
    misleading, and we rely on other documents to find out more. Later 
    in the text there is a photograph of a young Maron and her mother 
    at a demonstration. This, it transpires, is an event almost 
    entirely unremembered by both Maron and her mother:
‘Ob ich die flüchtigen Bilder, 
    die sich für mich mit dem Foto verbinden, wirklich auf dieser 
    Demonstration gesehen habe oder auf einer anderen oder ob ich sie 
    nur aus einem Film kenne, der mich an das Foto erinnert hat kann 
    ich nicht sicher sagen.’ 
In this situation we have the photographic evidence, but no 
    memory to back it up. Through this, Maron shows how unreliable 
    memory is. She does not trust her memories, but the photo exists 
    nevertheless, in all its ‘evidential force’ 
    13Barthes, 1993, p. 
    88.. Maron uses many different sources from which to 
    draw her story, but none of them are shown to be hugely reliable: 
    even when something is shown unequivocally, either through the 
    existence of a letter, document or photograph from the time, it is 
    often unremembered, and memory is shown to be highly unreliable. 
    The sources used serve to highlight how little can be remembered, 
    even of what may seem to be life-changing events at the time.
As Byrnes argues: ‘the immediate visual impact of photographs 
    ostensible prompts recollection and authenticates the past. 
    However, their role in Maron’s narrative is complex and 
    occasionally ambiguous’. 
    14Byrnes, 2011, p. 
    122. In Pawels Briefe, Maron 
    illustrates how unreliable memory can be and how fragile the 
    sources that we have are: she uses photography to back up and 
    support memory, but at the same time acknowledges that photography 
    is, by its nature, a flawed means of remembering and that it 
    continually falls short of what she asks of it. The sense of 
    uncertainty that pervades the text is not removed by the 
    photographs, but is, on occasion, enhanced. The role that 
    photography plays throughout the text is a complex one that varies 
    from photograph to photograph: sometimes it has an illustrative 
    function, sometimes it acts as a historical source or testament to 
    the truth of something and sometimes Maron seeks, within 
    photographs, more than can possible be read from the photograph 
    itself, simply because of the nature of photography. Photographs, 
    by nature, cannot have more than an evidential role, showing ‘what 
    has been’, although the role that it plays in Pawels 
    Briefe asks more of it than this. 
