IFSS UK Coursework – Financial Regulation, Benefits of 
    Intermediation, and Role of the Central Banks
Introduction
As societies and economies progress and become more increasingly 
    modern, the need to have sufficient bodies which regulate the 
    activities of financial institutions increases. While regulation is 
    important, it is also important that these bodies which regulate 
    create a balance so as not to stifle economic growth and progress. 
    Regulation can help overcome some issues that arise from a free 
    market.
Main section
Regardless of area in society we are required to have some form 
    of regulation to ensure that there is as much of a level playing 
    field as possible so that advantage cannot be taken by one 
    party.
Why is financial regulation so important?
Compared to other areas of society, failure in financial 
    services has much more serious implications. This requires 
    regulation to go further than it would usually do in other sectors 
    to ensure that one failure does not have a domino effect of a 
    liquidity crisis or some other form of crisis knocking onto more 
    than one institution. Some of the bodies who impose regulation are 
    the Bank of International Settlements which passes “soft law” that 
    can be adopted by the Financial Policy Committee, and Prudential 
    Regulatory Authority as part of the Bank of England as well as the 
    Financial Conduct Authority, part of HM Treasury.
These bodies intend to use this prudential regulation in order 
    to mitigate as much as possible against a couple of problems as 
    Ford (2015) stipulates Power has passed to 
    the regulators. They lay down the law in banking boardrooms, 
    prescribing not only how financial institutions conduct themselves, 
    but also the type of risks that they should run.
These problems are the externalities problem, asymmetric 
    information, the moral hazard problem and principal agent problem. 
    The externalities problem concerns the effect of a crisis within a 
    financial institution has on the environment around it such as 
    causing further crises across the wider economy. The asymmetric 
    information problem is where directors and managers have better 
    knowledge on company than potential lenders or investors which 
    could mislead these parties. This could also take the form of 
    insider dealing where critical information known to insiders of a 
    company is used to benefit those in the know. Countries have laws 
    against this. The moral hazard being encouraged to take more risk 
    than is necessary due to there being safety net “compensation” in 
    event of failure. The principal-agent problem directors and manager 
    agents of shareholders but might choose to work to their own 
    targets which might involve having to take more risk at the expense 
    of shareholders.
As a result of the issues above prudential regulation is imposed 
    through various means one of which is capital adequacy.
Capital adequacy ratio relates to the amount of capital funds 
    that a financial intuition holds “in reserve” so that should there 
    be a crisis or the value of the institutions assets fall 
    dramatically, then the institution has enough “reserve” to fall 
    back on. The current minimum capital adequacy ratio for a financial 
    institution in the UK as per the Bank of England (2015) is to be 
    11% of risk-weighted assets. This means that institutions are 
    required to hold 11% of the value of their assets value (mortgage 
    loans, etc.) in the form of capital as opposed to liabilities such 
    as short term deposits.
If the problems discussed above are not controlled then this can 
    lead to financial institutions becoming reckless which could lead 
    to their downfall and leads to a larger distrust of the financial 
    services sector generally. We see examples of this recklessness 
    through things like inappropriate selling of financial products or 
    services such the incident described by McCormick, M., & 
    Binham, C. (2019) The Financial Conduct 
    Authority levied a £29.1m fine on Carphone Warehouse….after the 
    mobile-phone retailer mis-sold its “Geek Squad” insurance and 
    technical-support product . Another example of recklessness is 
    fines which are issued for breaches of sanctions placed onto 
    financial institutions. Yet another example of recklessness is 
    having anti-money laundering processes which are not sufficient 
    enough to stop these crimes being committed using financial 
    institutions as laid out by the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) 
    (2019) The FCA found serious and sustained 
    shortcomings in Standard Chartered’s AML controls relating to 
    customer due diligence and ongoing monitoring….Standard Chartered’s 
    agreement to accept the FCA’s findings meant it qualified for a 30% 
    discount. Otherwise, the FCA would have imposed a financial penalty 
    of £145,947,500. add to this the 
    events as described by Jenkins (2012) HSBC is braced for a 
    settlement with US regulators that could top $2bn….from its 
    involvement in alleged money laundering and other rule breaches.
Prudential regulation, however is not the only type of 
    regulation which is imposed on financial institutions.
How does it differ from “ordinary” regulation?
There are more examples of other types of regulation which 
    cannot be escaped structural regulation and investment 
    protection.
Structural regulation differs from prudential regulation as 
    is sets physical limits onto the 
    affairs of financial institutions, dictating which services that 
    they can offer, products that they can sell to customers and 
    exactly where they are allowed to do business described by Ford 
    (2015) Banks can do little without regulatory 
    blessing. They cannot buy and sell subsidiaries or launch new 
    products….its financial policy committee can step in and curb how 
    many loans of a certain type they can sell. This idea of 
    restriction on trade is much like the regulation around the 
    licensing of alcohol sale as the UK Government (2005) allude to 
    Licensing (Scotland) Act 2005 63 Prohibition of sale, consumption 
    and taking away of alcohol outwith licensed hours 
    
(1)Subject to subsection (2), a person commits an offence if, 
    outwith licensed hours, the person—
(a)sells alcohol, or allows alcohol to be sold, on licensed 
    premises,
(b)allows alcohol to be consumed on licensed premises, or
(c)allows alcohol to be taken from licensed premises. 
    that restricts the activities of 
    licensed premises as to the timing of which they are allowed to 
    sell alcohol. As with institutions which break regulation in a 
    financial setting, there are also fines for breaching alcohol 
    legislation however these are smaller in comparison as alluded to 
    by the UK Government (2005) A person guilty 
    of an offence under this section is liable on summary conviction to 
    a fine not exceeding level 3 on the standard scale.
Investment protection (conduct of business) also differs from 
    prudential regulation as this covers measures designed to protect 
    investors from events such as mismanagement of funds, incompetence, 
    malpractice and fraud. Some examples of this idea outside of 
    financial services are things which are designed to protect 
    consumers such as health and safety legislation as stated by Tesco 
    PLC (2015) Our own standards exceed basic 
    legal requirements to ensure that no-one is exposed to injury or 
    harm. as well as food standards also 
    alluded to by Tesco PLC (2015) Our customers 
    expect us to only sell products made to the highest quality and 
    they trust us to ensure that all our products are safe and comply 
    with all applicable laws and regulations.
Conclusion
While having competent and robust regulation in place is 
    important as set out above, it is also important that this 
    regulation seeks to strike a balance between penalising where 
    appropriate and allowing the market to be as free as it possibly 
    can. This is to ensure that the financial services sector can still 
    function and grow exponentially without fear of plateauing or 
    conceding business due to over-regulation which could lead to a 
    less stable marketplace that would be less favourable to every 
    institution operating within its reaches.
