CANADA BUSINESS REPORT

1. Introduction
This report explores the potential risks and opportunities to a 
    consumer goods organisation operating within Canada. The framework 
    utilised by this report is a PESTEL analysis, with a more 
    pronounced focus on the political, economic and social aspects, 
    with technological and other aspects out with this framework found 
    within the report. Information and raw data have been gathered from 
    a number of references such as the World Economic Forum and the 
    IMF.
2. Method and Findings
Using a PESTEL Analysis framework, the table below is a repeat 
    of the key findings from the report. Following the table is the 
    source of the data and a discussion that allowed the findings to be 
    summarised more clearly in the table and at the end. The following 
    sections will go into further detail, to convey the methodology.

2.1 Economic
Firstly, this section will look at the current economic 
    indicators underpinning Canada. Canada’s GDP amounts to 1.713 
    trillion US dollars meaning that Canada has the 10th largest GDP in 
    the world (Data.worldbank.org, 2019) In addition, real growth is 
    currently at 1.5% in 2019 down from 3% in 2017 (Imf.org, 2019). 
    This could be related to escalating global trade tensions (see 
    Geopolitical Risks). From the raw data provided, it can be seen 
    that Canadas economy is currently experiencing relatively stable 
    growth, this is also forecasted to remain at roughly 1.5% for the 
    next 3 years (Alexander, 2019).
2.1.1 International Trading Conditions
Canada is an exporting nation, the 12th largest in the world to 
    be exact and is part of two key trade agreements (Oec.world, 2017). 
    The first of which is the Comprehensive Economic and Trade 
    Agreement (CETA). This is a free trade agreement that took more 
    than 10 years to negotiate and means that businesses operating in 
    Canada will be able to export or import to and from the EU, which 
    is Canada’s second largest trading partner, with 98% of tariff 
    lines being duty free (Canada, 2019). This is important for 
    multinational consumer goods businesses operating in Canada who 
    rely on imports from the EU or ones who export their goods to the 
    EU. It is even more beneficial for businesses that trade in 
    machinery or use machinery to add value to their product. This is 
    because machinery accounted for 24% of imports (Ec.europa.eu, 2019; 
    The OEC, 2019). In 2017 exports to the European Union were worth 
    10% of total exports, 16% of total imports and the value of trade 
    between the two, in 2018 now amounts to 72.3 billion euros (ibid.). 
    CETA gives businesses the opportunity to grow in this market and 
    find it relatively easy to trade with the EU from Canada. However, 
    of this 10%, it is important to note that the UK accounts for 4%, 
    in 2017 (The OEC, 2019). If Brexit occurs this could mean trade 
    with the UK would be done under world trade organisation rules, 
    resulting in more difficulty trading with the UK through possible 
    tariffs. Overall, trading conditions in regard to Europe appear to 
    be relatively frictionless because of this agreement and increases 
    product market competition through reducing/removing trading 
    barriers. The OECD forecasts that this will improve productivity 
    that has been causing a slowdown in GDP growth (OECD, 2019).
Canada’s largest and closest trading partner however is the US. 
    Exports accounted for 73% of total trade in 2017 valued at $275 
    billion (The OEC, 2019). Total imports from the country amounted to 
    46%. The President of the US, Donald Trump has recently ratified 
    the previous North American Free Trade agreement (NAFTA) and has 
    replaced it with the United States-Mexico-Canada Agreement (USMCA). 
    One of the major changes is that any member of the agreement can 
    pull out of the agreement with 6 months’ notice. This is a 
    potential uncertainty that lingers over businesses who trade within 
    North America. One of Canada’s largest exports is cars worth 12% of 
    its total exports (The OEC, 2019). Previously with NAFTA to claim 
    no tariffs on cars 62.5% of parts must be produced in one of the 3 
    nations, however that has now increased to 75%., which may 
    incentivise business to source more parts from one of the three 
    nations, however as labour conditions and wages are higher in North 
    America, this could lead to increase of prices for businesses in 
    this industry (Kiley, 2019). This ratification has also meant that 
    previous tariffs threatened by Trump will, for the moment, not take 
    place. However, 25% worth of tariffs do remain on aluminium and 
    steel (ibid.). Trump’s solution to the US trade deficit is to rip 
    up or ratify trade agreements and increase tariffs on any industry 
    or country that the US has a trade deficit with. Due to this, 
    businesses operating in Canada need to remain vigilant. As 
    previously stated, a nation can pull out of the agreement with just 
    6 months’ notice. Canada’s economy, much like the rest of the 
    worlds has been shook by the US’s new trade policies in particular 
    the mounting trade war between Canada and China, as well as other 
    rising trade tensions across the globe, in particular the movement 
    away from frictionless trade and one towards tariffs (World 
    Economic Forum, 2019).
In spite of this Canada is in a relatively good position in 
    terms of trade. It has agreements with both of its two largest 
    trading partners the US and the EU, making it easier for 
    multinational organisations to do business there and gives them the 
    opportunity to grow in these markets and increase exports/imports. 
    No tariffs may also allow businesses to trade more and reduce 
    prices on products. Another opportunity is with no tariffs 
    manufacturing goods may be able to improve efficiency by operating 
    Just in Time policies across borders. The deal with the EU is long 
    term and expected to remain with little to not ratification in the 
    foreseeable future. On the other hand, the deal with the US and 
    Mexico, is slightly more uncertain, but not much. It is advised 
    that Multinationals listen to the rhetoric from the US president in 
    the run up to the 2020 election, in order to assess future trade 
    risks between the US and Canada.
2.1.2 Geopolitical Risks to Canada's Economy
There are 2 key geopolitical events that are posing risk to the 
    Canadian, and global economy, briefly described earlier. First, is 
    the mounting trade tensions between the US and China, and the 
    second is a disorderly departure of the UK from Europe. Both of 
    which could damage the global economy and could potentially result 
    in Canada entering a recession (Alexander, 2019). Thus, raising the 
    question: how resilient is Canadas financial services?
2.1.3 Resilience of Financial Markets
The Financial crisis of 2008-2009 resulted Canada going into 
    recession, but it managed to recover relatively quickly. This is 
    because Canada, at the time, had the most financially sound banking 
    system in the world. Little has changed, in 2017-2018 Canada has 
    been ranked 2nd in the world only to Finland (Global 
    Competitiveness Index, 2018). Canada’s the 3rd largest oil exporter 
    in the world and was hit greatly by the 2014 oil price shock, 
    forcing Canada into a recession in 2015. The IMF states that 
    through “accommodative monetary policy” Canada quickly recovered 
    and had the strongest growth rates out of the G7 nations in 2017 
    (IMF, 2019). Businesses operating here will be able to be fairly 
    certain and confident in the financial resilience of the 
    country.
2.2 Politics
2.2.1 Current Political Scenario
Canada operates as a federal parliamentary democracy under a 
    constitutional monarchy. The parliamentary terms are 5 years with 
    no term limits, and the government can remain so long as it has the 
    confidence of parliament (Cia.gov, 2019). This is important because 
    it means business can understand that decisions are more likely to 
    be planned for the term of government so within a 5-year term limit 
    or if they are fairly confident, longer. The most recent election 
    held in Canada took place on the 21st October 2019 
    (Enr.elections.ca, 2019). Justin Trudeau, leader of the liberal 
    party, has retained his position as the Prime Minister of Canada. 
    The most prominent parties that could be voted for across all 10 
    provinces are Justin Trudeau’s centre left Liberal party and the 
    centre right Conservative party (centre right). This last election 
    saw the Liberal Party lose its majority and saw their total seats 
    drop to 157 out of 358. The Conservatives came second with 121 
    seats (Enr.elections.ca, 2019). Thus, more co-operation will be 
    needed across the parliament in order for the Canadian government 
    to advance its policies. This is important for organisations to 
    know as it means government policy will be harder to implement over 
    the next 5 years.
In general, Canadian politics are relatively stable, with 
    governments being formed either by the Conservatives or the Liberal 
    Party. One important social fragmentation to consider is that the 
    3rd largest party is now the Bloc Quebecois, a party who argues for 
    Quebec to be independent (Enr.elections.ca, 2019). The government 
    may rely on their votes to pass policies, which might involve 
    financial benefits for Quebec or more political power than the 
    province currently holds. Dependent on the government of Quebec, 
    opportunities may arise for businesses operating in the province. 
    However, in terms of risk, it does not look likely that the 
    province of Quebec will separate from Canada based on the fact 
    there has been no specific big event or change, similar to Brexit, 
    that could increase support for an independent Quebec.
In terms of policies, Canada does tend to be pro-business and 
    has banks for business development and a bank that helps business 
    looking to export (BDC, 2019). Each of which provides opportunities 
    in themselves. In recent years, emphasis has been put on education 
    as well as infrastructure, with the government setting up a bank 
    for infrastructure, which has a resulted in deals that will result 
    in the port in Montreal to be expanded and a hydroelectricity 
    expansion project (Canada Infrastructure Bank, 2019).
2.2.2 Transparency and Corruption
According to a report published by Transparency International 
    (2018), Canada has “one of the most well-established and robust 
    lobbying regulations worldwide”. One of the acts passed by the 
    Canadian parliament in 1985 and last amended in 2008, is The 
    Lobbying Act (Laws.justice.gc.ca, 2019). This act in effect means 
    that organisations who do lobby in Canada, will be published openly 
    online. Breaching this act can result in “fines of up to CA$200,000 
    and/or imprisonment” (Transparency International, 2018). This is of 
    course important for business to understand the risks surrounding 
    lobbying and transparency in general. It also shows that corruption 
    in Canada is minimal compared to other countries, making the ease 
    of doing business relatively simple so long as transparency is 
    upheld.
2.2.3 Legislation
Current legislation is based off English common law on a federal 
    level (Cia.gov, 2019). Based on current legislation, organisations 
    in Canada find it relatively easy to pay taxes, with Canada being 
    ranked 19th in the world in terms of ease of paying taxes, above 
    that of the US (World Bank Group, 2019).
2.3 Social
2.3.1 Demographic overview
Internally, Canada has an estimated population in 2018 of 
    35,881,659 (Cia.gov, 2019). The northern area of Canada is largely 
    unhabitable, for this reason the vast number of the population are 
    spread across the largest land border in the world with the US 
    (ibid.). This is a very large market and is graded as one with a 
    high income and highly educated people (World Bank Group, 2019).
2.3.2 Importance of Language / Mind your Language
Canada has two official languages English (58.7%) and French 
    (22%) (Cia.gov, 2019). The languages spoken have of course 
    implications on organisations operating in Canada. First of all, 
    with the CETA agreement previously discussed, businesses have the 
    opportunity to hire French speakers to help increase market share 
    in France or to make doing trading with the country easier. 
    Quebec’s official language is French and has strict legislation and 
    regulation to encourage the French language to be used. This poses 
    risks such as internal trade barriers, with marketing needing to be 
    in French to operate or sell goods in this province. The most 
    recent case involved Air Canada, in which the court ruled that the 
    airline violated a French couples linguistic rights. One of the 
    reasons given was that the French word for ‘exit’ was written 
    smaller than that of the English one (BBC News, 2019).
2.3.3 Workforce
The unemployment rate hit a record low this year and currently 
    sits at 5.5%. (Ceicdata.com. 2019). This is relatively healthy 
    giving organisations the opportunity to recruit from a reasonable 
    sized pool of labour and little risk of a decrease in customer 
    spending from this number. Risks to Canada’s economy and workforce 
    is, like in many western nations, an ageing population with less 
    women giving birth to children, and more placing value on their 
    future career (Whiting, 2018) Canada understands this and the 
    current government announced in 2018 to increase migration to the 
    country by just over one million people over a three-year basis. 
    With that said, 48% of the total admitted will be skilled workers 
    facilitated by economic programmes (Whiting, 2018). This gives 
    business the opportunity to fill their own skill gaps that may have 
    persisted in the past, in addition given the open political 
    situation discussed above, this report forecasts more immigration 
    in the future. Through this increase in worker population through 
    migration, the risk of corporate or individual income tax hikes 
    remains low. It is also important to note that Canada has the most 
    diverse workforce in the world (WEF, 2019), which has been leading 
    to new ideas and supporting Canada as an innovative and outward 
    looking nation. The new ideas from such a diverse workforce can 
    lead to opportunity of innovation within organisations operating in 
    Canada. Another factor is that Canada’s is highly educated, and 
    this is set to increase as the Liberal Party promises further 
    spending increases in higher education institutions (WEF, 2019). 
    This also plays a positive role in innovation and developing 
    skilled roles within organisations operating there.
3. Concluding Summary
This report has highlighted key opportunities and risks for 
    businesses operating in Canada. Most of which can be found in the 
    table at the beginning of this report. Canada’s political system is 
    transparent and for the foreseeable future easy to predict, 
    providing business with certainty towards future legislation and 
    therefore is in its nature low in risk. Government policy makes it 
    easy to do business in this country through the introduction of 
    specific banks for specific economic challenges facing businesses. 
    This includes banks that provide advice for businesses looking to 
    export and banks that are set up specifically to improve 
    infrastructure. In terms of economic outlook, GDP is set to grow at 
    a sustainable level of 1.5 percent for the next 3 years. In 
    addition, international trade is a great opportunity for 
    organisations operating in this market through trade deals with 
    Canada’s two largest trading partners. This provides businesses 
    with the opportunity to improve efficiency in manufacturing, which 
    will have a positive effect on supply chains. In addition, 
    organisations have access to large markets beyond Canada, allowing 
    a number of opportunities from sourcing high quality materials at 
    lower costs or grow markets internally and externally. There are 
    key geopolitical risks, that have been highlighted: mounting global 
    trade tensions and a disorderly Brexit, that could cause Canada’s 
    economy to suffer. However as pointed out, financial institutions 
    in Canada are some of the strongest in the world and have 
    previously provided much needed resilience to previous economic 
    shocks. Finally, the report placed emphasis on the demographics, 
    focusing on the workforce. The workforce is highly educated and the 
    most diverse in the world, this has resulted in opportunities in 
    terms of new creative ideas which could further encourage 
    innovation within organisations operating there. There are risks, 
    for example, an ageing population, but government policy has 
    countered the risks through economic programmes that will allow 
    immigration of more than 1 million over the next three years, 48% 
    of which will be skilled workers specific to skill gaps faced by 
    industry in the country.
Based on the concluding ideas Canada has risks, however they are 
    very low and organisations in Canada have more opportunities than 
    not.
3.1 Limitations
The limitations of this report are that the framework used, and 
    the analysis does tend to overlap with one another. Political 
    decisions mentioned do have an impact on the social aspects of the 
    workforce as mentioned above. That is the reason behind the table 
    at the start and the long summary at the end to bring the ideas 
    spoken about into a coherent and clear structure that leads to the 
    concluding ideas.

