5. The physicality and sexuality repressed by Kafka’s 
    protagonists, usually busy professional men, returns in frightening 
    or disgusting forms’. Discuss this 
    statement with reference to Ein 
    Landarzt.
Kafka’s short story 
    Ein 
    Landarzt tells the story of a doctor 
    going out on a night call to see a patient who is gravely ill. The 
    story, although it is never described as a dream, ‘has the 
    alogical surface texture of the dream; details appear not as links 
    in a chain of causation but merely because they happen to come to 
    mind’1Hans Guth, ‘Symbol 
    and Contextual Restraint: Kafka’s Country Doctor’, 
    PMLA, Vol. 80 No. 4: 427-431 
    (p.427).Not least because of this, it lends itself to 
    interpretation using Freud’s theories of the dream, discussed in 
    The Interpretation of Dreams. This approach is 
    further justified by the fact that there is direct evidence, both 
    in the text and in Kafka’s letters and diaries from 1917, when 
    Ein 
    Landarztwas written, that he had read 
    The Interpretation of Dreams and had an interest 
    in psychoanalysis and dream 
    theory.2Karen J Campbell, ‘On the 
    Sources of Kafka’s Landarzt’, The German 
    Quarterly, Vol. 60 No. 3: 420-431 
    (p.421)..Using Freud’s theories, it is possible to 
    unlock the ‘physicality and sexuality’ repressed by 
    the doctor inEin 
    Landarzt, that emerges in other aspects 
    of the story. Freud talks about dreams as the fulfilments of 
    wishes, and suggests that the less acceptable we find a wish, the 
    more we repress it, and the more distorted the wish is when it 
    reappears in dreams.3Sigmund Freud, 
    ‘Distortion in Dreams’, The Standard Edition of 
    the Complete Psychological works of Sigmund Freud. Vol.10 
    pp134-162, London, Hogarth Press and the Institute of 
    Psychoanalysis Through this process, we see the 
    conscious and unconscious mind in a constant struggle with each 
    other, and it is as a result of this struggle that the manifest 
    dream (the dream which we remember when we wake) emerges. By 
    treating Ein 
    Landarzt as a dream narrative, or the 
    telling of a manifest dream, it is possible to analyse and come to 
    an understanding of the hidden desires of the country doctor, and 
    the way they re-emerge in the narrative in a different form, as 
    through the process of distortion in dreams. This essay will 
    discuss the emergence of the doctor’s repressed desires in certain 
    aspects of the short story 
    Ein 
    Landarzt
The strongest, and in many ways most brutal example of 
    physicality and sexuality in 
    Ein 
    Landarzt can be seen in the character of 
    the 
    Pferdeknecht. 
    The 
    Knecht 
    comes crawling out of the doctor’s pigsty on all fours, and is 
    described as showing his ‘offenes blauäugiges 
    Gesicht’ (p.168). This stark contrast between the animal 
    and the human characterises the 
    Knecht 
    – he is driven by animal desires or by ‘some kind of energy, 
    not paralysed by thought’ 
    4Guth, 1965, p. 
    430. as can be seen in his brutal treatment and 
    implied rape of Rosa, the doctor’s maid. Not only this, but the 
    
    Knecht 
    can also be viewed as the doctor himself, or more explicitly as the 
    doctor’s subconscious self; the
    Lust-Ich 
    described by Freud. The physicality that the doctor endeavours to 
    repress comes out, by means of distortion, in the 
    Knecht. 
    Thus, the
    Lust-Ich 
    is satisfied in its desires and the wish, that in waking life is 
    repressed by the 
    Real-Ich, 
    is fulfilled. The efforts of the 
    Real-Ich 
    can be seen here as well, when the 
    Knecht 
    bites Rosa in the cheek and the doctor comes to the defence of Rosa 
    ‘”Du Vieh,’ schrie ich wütend, “willst du die Peitsche?”, 
    besinne mich aber gleich, da es ein Fremder ist; willig aushilft, 
    wo alle andern versagen’ (p.169). The doctor’s 
    Real-Ich 
    quells his violent wish to whip the 
    Knecht 
    for his behaviour against Rosa, 
    when he recognises the act of whipping as brutal and unacceptable, 
    especially given that the 
    Knecht 
    is helping him, and therefore he restrains himself. 
    Thus we see the doctor repressing even a 
    form of repression (the whipping of the 
    Knecht) 
    which takes us back again to Freud: it is not in the repression 
    itself that the problem lies, but in too much 
    repression. The physicality repressed here twofold by the doctor 
    must re-emerge.
The horses, which emerge from the doctor’s own pigsty at the 
    call of the 
    Pferdeknecht, 
    also present a powerful image of physicality. The idea of the 
    
    Knecht 
    as the form through which the sexuality and physicality of the 
    doctor returns is added to by the fact that, if anyone, it is he 
    who is in control of the horses. They come forth at his command and 
    their emergence from the pigsty is a very physical and somewhat 
    grotesque image:
‘zwei Pferde, mächtige flankenstarke Tiere schoben sich 
    hintereinander, die Beine eng am Leib, die wohlgeformten Köpfe wie 
    Kamele senkend, nur durch die Kraft der Wendungen ihres Rumpfes aus 
    dem Türloch, das sie restlos ausfüllten. Aber gleich standen sie 
    aufrecht, hochbeinig, mit dicht ausdampfendem Körper.’ 
    (p.168/9)
By describing the horses in so physical a way, Kafka strengthens 
    the link between the horses and the
    Knecht, 
    and throughout the text juxtaposes this image of strength and 
    prowess with the doctor’s lack of control over the hoses. When the 
    doctor leaves the patient’s house the horses are slow and he cannot 
    make them go any faster: ‘”Munter!” sagte ich, aber munter 
    ging’s nicht’ (p.174). This creates a contrast with the 
    former departure of the horses, where the Knecht cries 
    ‘Munter!’ and claps his hands, and the horses move 
    so fast the journey passes in the blink of an eye (p.169). In spite 
    of the very physical or animal image they present on first 
    appearing, the horses also display some more human characteristics: 
    while the doctor is examining the patient they watch him, their 
    heads through the window, and their whinnying serves as a reminder 
    of Rosa and her plight to the doctor. They are given more than 
    merely animal significance; indeed they are described at the end of 
    the story as being unearthly, which shows that their role in the 
    narrative is more important than merely the role of two animals.
Parallels have been drawn between the horses and Plato’s theory 
    for the tripartide human soul. ‘He describes a charioteer 
    with two horses, a white horse that symbolises intellect and a dark 
    horse that represents instinct. The rider symbolises moral 
    intelligence and is both rational and moral.’ 
    5Aaron Manson, ‘A Theology of 
    Illness: Franz Kafka’s “A Country Doctor”’, Literature and 
    Medicine Vol. 24 (p.301) The fact, not only 
    that Kafka’s doctor has no control over the horses, but also that 
    by the end of the story the horses are barely even attached to one 
    another shows the fragmented state of the doctor. He is utterly 
    powerless in every aspect of the story, and has no control over 
    what takes place: the only time he himself has a direct influence 
    is when he flees his patient’s sickroom, naked, and the result of 
    this is the nightmarish end to the story: ‘Nackt, dem Froste 
    dieses unglückseligsten Zeitalters ausgesetzt, mit irdischem Wagen, 
    unirdischen Pferden, treibe ich mich alter Mann umher’ 
    (174). This shows the doctor’s feelings of impotency and awareness 
    of and frustration with his own lack of control.
Further to this, there is also the fact that the horses and the 
    Knecht are both found in the doctor’s own 
    pigsty, and on their appearance Rosa says ‘Man weiß nicht, 
    was für Dinge man im eigenen Hause vorrätig hat,’ (p.168). 
    This is clearly a slightly flippant and ironic reference, on the 
    part of Kafka, to the very obvious Freudian idea that nobody knows 
    what is concealed in his or her own subconscious. The fact that the 
    doctor’s subconscious, from whence come his animal desires, is a 
    pigsty is also telling: what emerges will not be something clean 
    and pure, but rather something (perceived as) dirty and rotten.
Another very significant symbol in
    Ein 
    Landarzt is that of the wound the doctor 
    eventually discovers in the side of the patient. The fact that the 
    boy has so serious a wound but that it goes unnoticed by the doctor 
    until he sees the boy’s sister flapping a bloodied cloth, shows 
    that he is not good at his profession. This idea is furthered by 
    the fact that at first he pronounces the patient to be healthy and 
    then after seeing the wound he says ‘Armer Junge, dir ist 
    nicht zu helfen’ (p.172). In the first case, if the boy is 
    healthy the doctor need do nothing for him, and in the second he 
    pronounces the boy to be beyond help, and therefore again does not 
    have to do anything. He is both powerless to do anything to help 
    the boy, and powerless to help Rosa in her plight, which adds to 
    the general sense of the doctor’s impotency, felt throughout the 
    story.
Another important symbol of the sexuality and physicality 
    repressed by the doctor in
    Ein 
    Landarzt is that of the wound the doctor 
    discovers in the side of the patient he has been called out to see. 
    It is described thus:
‘In seiner rechten Seite, in der Hüftengegend hat sich 
    ein handtellergroße Wunde aufgetan. Rosa, in vielen Schattierungen, 
    dunkel in der Tiefe, hellwerdend zu den Rändern, zartkornig, mit 
    ungleichmassig sich aufsammelndem Blut, offen wie ein Bergwerk 
    obertags’(p. 172).
The fact the wound is described as being ‘Rosa’ 
    instantly connects it with the doctor’s maid. Eric Marson and Keith 
    Leopold draw attention to the fact that Rosa is the only character 
    given a name in the whole story, and when this is taken into 
    account the connection becomes even more potent. 
    6Eric Marson, and Keith Leopold, 
    ‘Kafka, Freud and “Ein Landarzt”’, The German 
    Quarterly, Vol. 37 No. 2: 146-160 (p.153) 
    Whilst they take the wound to be the psyche or soul of the boy, and 
    Rosa to be the psyche of the doctor, I think another possible 
    interpretation, which is perhaps more explicit, is that the wound 
    is another representation of what the doctor is trying to repress: 
    his sexual attraction to Rosa. On closer inspection the wound 
    proves to be infested with worms.
‘Würmer, an Stärke und Länge meinem kleinen Finger 
    gleich, rosig aus eigenem und außerdem blutbespritzt, winden sich, 
    im Innern der Wunde festgehalten, mit weißen Köpfchen, mit vielen 
    Beinchen ans Licht’ (p.172).
This is a disturbing and very detailed phallic image, and shows 
    the extent of the doctor’s repression: his attraction to Rosa has 
    emerged again, but this time distorted into an even more 
    frightening, grotesque form. The sexual nature of the wound is 
    clear not only from its description, but also from the fact that it 
    occurs in the hip area of the boy. The doctor’s reaction to the 
    wound also serves to develop this link between Rosa and the wound, 
    and the 
    Knecht 
    and the doctor. If the 
    Knecht represents the 
    doctor’s 
    Lust-Ich, 
    and his rape of Rosa satisfies the doctor’s desire for Rosa, then 
    it is natural that on looking at the wound, he would feel, instead 
    of the revulsion felt by the reader at its description, a certain 
    admiration, which indeed he does: ‘Wer kann das sehen, ohne 
    leise zu pfeifen?’(p.172). The wound is, therefore, another 
    means through which the desires of the doctor, to which he pays 
    little regard and can indeed overlook, just as he initially 
    overlooks the wound and does not punish the 
    Knecht 
    for biting Rosa: he does not wish to be faced with these desires 
    because he deems them to be unacceptable. However, the fact that 
    the worms the wound is infested with are so small suggests that 
    ‘sex is another responsibility the doctor cannot perform, 
    just as he is unable to perform his professional duty.’ 
    7Manson, 2005, p. 
    305
The doctor in Kafka’s 
    Ein 
    Landarzt represses his own physicality 
    and sexuality, and it therefore returns, through his subconscious, 
    in various frightening and disgusting forms. They appear first as 
    the 
    Pferdeknecht, 
    who is presented, apart from having blue eyes, as scarcely human in 
    his behaviour: he has control over the unearthly horses and he has 
    none of the social problems experienced by the doctor. The doctor’s 
    repressed physicality and sexuality also appear later in the form 
    of the wound in the side of the patient he has been called on to 
    attend, in an even more grotesque and startling image. By applying 
    theories from Freud’s Interpretation of Dreams 
    we can see the internal workings of the doctor’s mind, and analyse 
    what is essentially a professional stress-dream, but also shows the 
    doctor’s latent sexual attraction to his maid Rosa.
