TODO
Ethics Summative Assignment

Part 1- Professionalism in Nursing
The Nursing and Midwifery Code (NMC) sets out standards for 
    professionalism that all registered nurses are to uphold. Nurse 
    Judge did not entirely disregard the Code during the course of the 
    incident and the ensuing trial; she upheld some of the standards 
    but did not uphold others.
Nurse Judge acted in a way that was alleged to have caused the 
    patient, who had limited ability to communicate, to become agitated 
    and upset. This goes directly against point 20.5 of the NMC Code 
    which says that people with vulnerability should not be taken 
    advantage of, or “cause them upset or distress” 
    (Nursing and Midwifery Council , 2015). During this incident she 
    did not act in a professional manner and hence did not adhere to 
    the Code. It was witnessed that her actions directly caused the 
    patient to become more distressed and agitated.
In comparison Nurse Judge adhered to the Code by co-operating 
    with the investigation and did not appear to inhibit the course of 
    the investigation. By co-operating she upheld Standard 23 
    “Cooperate with all investigations and audits”.
The NMC investigation found that Nurse Judge had not upheld 
    Standard 20 “Uphold the reputation of your profession at all 
    times” (Nursing and Midwifery Council , 2015) this is 
    broken down into 10 key points in order to achieve the standard. 
    Nurse Judge did not uphold point 20.1 “keep to and uphold 
    the standards and values set out in the Code”, by not 
    upholding other standards she does not meet this standard. The next 
    point involves “treating people fairly and without 
    discrimination, bullying or harassment”, Nurse Judge’s 
    actions could be seen to be discriminatory, if the patient had been 
    able to communicate she may not have treated him in the manner she 
    did as he would have been able to tell other people. Whether or not 
    harassment has taken place cannot be shown as there is a lack of 
    evidence as to whether Nurse Judge’s intimidation of the patient 
    has occurred on more than one occasion. Point 20.4 “keep to 
    the laws of the country in which you are practising” it 
    could be said that Nurse Judge has upheld this point as she was 
    found not guilty of common law assault in a court of law. This does 
    however mean she did not break the law but they were unable to 
    prove without a doubt that she assaulted the Patient.
From the information provided on this occasion about Nurse Judge 
    it is clear that she did not act in a professional manner during 
    the course of her provision of care. She upheld many of the 
    professional standards but breached the ones that in my opinion can 
    have a much greater impact on the 
    patients’ that are under her care. 
    Witness statements alleged that Nurse Judge stopped her actions 
    each time someone else entered the room, to me this shows that she 
    knew what she was doing and it was not right as she did not want 
    others to see her doing this. She did not uphold the Code and 
    brought disrepute to the Nursing profession.
Part 2- Ethics in Nursing (523 words)
Reading through the case from the Professional Standard’s 
    Authority (PSA) I felt that there are several wrongs and rights of 
    this case, these encompass the ethical principles of justice, 
    non-maleficence, beneficence and integrity. When thinking of 
    integrity, the qualities a person must possess are honesty and 
    moral principles. The witnesses in this case are both practising 
    social workers and should act with integrity at all times. I 
    believe that although they are both professionals with many years 
    of experience working with people who have Mental Health 
    Conditions’ they may not be considered 
    the best witnesses. This is due to social workers potentially 
    looking for abuse where there is none. When the PSA made their 
    decision to strike Nurse Judge from the Register they were 
    partially relying on these witness statements. As these statements 
    had not been reliable enough to prosecute her with assault then I 
    do not believe they are reliable enough to erase her from the 
    register for physical abuse.
As already mentioned in the above section Nurse Judge acted to 
    cause agitation or distress to the Patient. The PSA decided that 
    the actions taken by Nurse Judge that caused the Patient to become 
    agitated amounted to emotional abuse. I consider this to be a part 
    of the case that was correct, as she was witnessed to have 
    stop what she was doing when 
    other people were in the room. This shows she knew her actions were 
    inappropriate, or she would have allowed other members of staff to 
    see her carrying out the so called “distraction 
    technique”. Nurse Judge’s actions go directly against the 
    ethical principle of nonmaleficence, or first do no harm. She acted 
    in a way that was visibly causing distress to someone who would be 
    unable to report her actions. Nurse Judge did also not display the 
    quality of beneficence, she did not appear to show any kindness or 
    good towards the Patient. These are key qualities and principles 
    that need to be shown and followed within the nursing 
    profession.
Nurse Judge maintained throughout the multiple court and panel 
    proceedings that she had not done anything wrong, and that the key 
    issue that day was having agency staff on shift. The NMC did not 
    highlight her lack of reflection as a large cause for concern and 
    barrier to her continuing to be on the Register. When the PSA took 
    the case, they highlighted Nurse Judge’s lack of reflection as a 
    major issue in relation to remaining on the Register. They did not 
    believe she had shown any “insight, remorse or 
    remediation” (Professional Standards Authority, 2016). The 
    incident occurred in October 2013, some 3 years before the NMC held 
    the hearing on Nurse Judge’s misconduct. That allowed more than 
    sufficient time for Nurse Judge to reflect on the incident and to 
    take meaningful steps to develop her skills for dealing with 
    challenging behaviour. Therefore, I think that it is right that her 
    lack of reflection was a factor in her removal for the Register as 
    she did not show any signs that this incident would not reoccur and 
    it did not seem that she thought she had done anything wrong.

Part 3- Legal Role of the Regulatory Body in Nursing (468 
    words)
The function of the NMC is to decide on and uphold the 
    professional standard in nursing and ensure “the 
    Code” is being upheld by all registrants. The NMCs role 
    within the Philomena Judge case was to consider Philomena Judge’s 
    actions or inactions and decide which Standards from the Code had 
    not been upheld and the penalties that should be brought against 
    her. The NMC decided that Philomena Judge was not fit to practise 
    and would be suspended from the Register for a minimum of one year. 
    During this time, she should undertake training on how to 
    deescalate situations and reflect on the actions she took during 
    the incident and how she would act to prevent this from happening 
    in the future. Only once this was complete would they consider 
    allowing her to practise as a nurse again.
The NMC ruled that Philomena Judge’s behaviour amounted to 
    serious misconduct and that the three charges of; “struck 
    patient A with your hand”, “on one or more occasions 
    struck Patient A with a mop/broom/brush handle” and 
    “inappropriate use of a mop/broom/brush handle in the course 
    of providing care to Patient A” (Nursing and Midwifery 
    Council, 2016) were all proven. Based on this the NMC panel decided 
    that Nurse Judge knew her actions to be abusive and that they were 
    carried out deliberately. I disagree with the NMCs ruling that 
    Nurse Judge should stay on the Register, as they had said 
    themselves that her actions constituted abuse and they were not 
    satisfied her actions would not be repeated. By saying her actions 
    may be repeated they are allowing her opportunity to inflict 
    emotional abuse and possibly physical abuse on another Patient.
The Professional Standards Authority for Health and Social Care 
    (PSA) then decided that they were not satisfied with the outcome of 
    the NMCs case and took Nurse Judge and the NMC to court. I agree 
    with the PSA’s decision to strike Philomena Judge from the Register 
    but I do not agree that the court costs should be paid by her. She 
    had already been out of work for nearly four years and has to pay 
    her own legal costs, I think that the costs should have all been 
    claimed from the NMC. I believe this as the NMC should have struck 
    her from the Register and the additional costs would not have been 
    incurred. When the PSA decided to overrule the NMC’s decision they 
    take away their autonomy and it could mean that future rulings that 
    they make could hold less authority in the eyes of the public. 
    Nurse Judge had 30 years of unblemished service as a nurse but this 
    does not mean her actions should go unpunished, with such a long 
    career she should have known what she was doing was wrong and that 
    she was acting with malice.
Bibliography
Nursing and Midwifery Council . (2015, March 29). NMC The Code. 
    Retrieved March 26, 2018, from Nursing and Midwifery Council: 
    https://www.nmc.org.uk/standards/code/read-the-code-online/#fivth
Nursing and Midwifery Council. (2016). Substantive Hearing. 
    London: Nursing and Midwifery Council.
Professional Standards Authority. (2016). Section 29 Case 
    Meeting Philomena. London: Professional Standards Authority.



