Orientalism and Portrayal of ‘The Other’ In Western Comic 
    Art
The idea of ‘The Other’ is one that has existed ever since 
    humans learned to notice differences between themselves and other 
    members of their own species. As human culture has developed we 
    have found new and increasingly complex ways of illustrating 
    contrast between ourselves and people of different colours, 
    ethnicities, religions, genders and sexualities. However, out of 
    all the various art forms that we have developed over the 
    centuries, bande 
    dessiné (or comics), is arguably the best medium 
    for illustrating and understanding the cultural perceptions of a 
    particular period. Of course, as with any art form, the people that 
    write and illustrate bandes 
    dessinées do not live in a cave, they live within 
    a society that inevitably impacts and can be seen in their work. 
    While this may also be true of other, more contemporary art forms, 
    one feature of bande 
    dessinée distinguishes it from all the rest. 
    Bande dessinée 
    artists do not draw intricate masterpieces with as much detail as a 
    renaissance painting. Instead they use more of an artistic 
    short-hand. This often results in depictions of certain subjects 
    being rather simplified, stereotypical, and even vastly 
    generalised. This provides a glimpse of the views and cultural 
    zeitgeists of the time when the 
    bande was first drawn (Stromberg, 2003).
This essay will first discuss some of the key principles of 
    Orientalism, which does have some overlap with the concept of the 
    Other, as described by Edward Said and Homi K. Bhabha respectively. 
    Then, we will look at some examples of Orientalism and the Other 
    being used in bande 
    dessiné, from both American and Franco-Belgian 
    publishers. Fredrik Stromberg’s books, Black Images in the 
    Comics and Comic Art Propaganda are incredibly useful and 
    extensive collections of western and eastern comic art, where one 
    can find numerous examples of Orientalism and the Other being 
    depicted in comic images throughout history. Although the term 
    Orientalism encompasses Asian, African and Middle Eastern 
    countries, the images discussed in this essay will be depictions of 
    Asian (specifically Chinese stereotypes). The depiction of other 
    cultural stereotypes in bande 
    dessiné must absolutely be studied, however this 
    is essay is too short to provide in depth analysis of stereotyping 
    for all three categories. Since Stromberg’s work effectively deals 
    with the African and Middle Eastern contingents, this essay will 
    focus on Asians.
Edward Said’s book, Orientalism (1978), 
    details the West’s (Europe and America) relationship with Africa 
    and the Middle and Far East, (the other in this context being the 
    East). In it, he argues that western societies have, over several 
    centuries, constructed an idea of the East (or the Orient) that is 
    distinctly contrasted with westerners’ image of themselves. This 
    perceived contrast provides the basis for innumerable theories, 
    attitudes and preconceptions of the Orient. The recurring theme 
    however, throughout the vast majority of oriental discourse, is a 
    token superiority of the West over the East. A large part of 
    Western cultural identity stems from contrasting oneself against 
    various Eastern stereotypes, based on the accumulated knowledge of 
    centuries of oriental discourse. This knowledge however, is 
    incomplete and biased at best, and is largely based on Western 
    projections and ideas of what the East should 
    be. Nonetheless, the West needs something to justify its own 
    superior self-image, something to prop itself up against. The 
    classic juxtaposition of ‘us and them’ is just another incarnation 
    of ‘the other’, and this is exactly what fuels western cultural 
    identity. Said argues that in renaissance times, the contrast was 
    civilised westerners versus impoverished eastern peasants. Nowadays 
    it could be argued that there is no shortage of middle eastern 
    stereotypes for westerners to position themselves against.
The concept of the Other is a hefty one – the term itself is 
    quite vague and encompasses various smaller schools of thought, one 
    of them being Orientalism. To understand the concept, it is 
    necessary to discuss the work of Homi Bhabha. Bhabha deals more 
    directly with the idea of the Other than Said does. A key component 
    of Bhabha’s work is the idea of the stereotype, which helps to 
    narrow down the idea of the Other. Bhabha, for the most part, 
    agrees with Said on the issue of oriental discourse, as he 
    incorporates it into his more general argument of colonial 
    discourse. Though this is an even denser and more general topic 
    than Orientalism, stereotyping and the Other feature more 
    prominently on the surface of Bhabha’s arguments than they do in 
    Said’s. In The Location of Culture (1994) Bhabha 
    argues that the West’s colonizing and domination of the East is 
    (falsely) justified by the ‘othering’ of the colonized people, and 
    by stereotyping them as inferior and 
    needing governed. 
    However, racial stereotyping or ‘othering’, and therefore colonial 
    power and discourse, are dependent on the stability and regularity 
    of constructed stereotypes. Stereotypes depend on validation of 
    projections and confirmation and repetition of previously acquired 
    knowledge. However, as stated before with Orientalism, this kind of 
    knowledge is never stable, and is based on projections by the 
    colonizers onto the colonized. Knowledge, or rather the lack 
    thereof, is the source of stereotyping and ‘othering’. As 
    always humans fear that which they lack knowledge 
    of, and so we develop oriental or colonial discourse, as a means of 
    understanding, controlling or ruling over something which we do not 
    actually truly understand.
This brings us back to Stromberg. His books consist of 
    collections of images from various 
    bandes dessinées 
    that portray people of various races in a crude and offensive 
    manner. In Black Images in the Comics (2003), 
    Stromberg prefixes these images with a brief explanation of what he 
    believes to be the cause of racial stereotyping in Western comic 
    art. He, like Bhabha, argues that lack of knowledge may be what 
    results in simplified, stereotypical depictions of ‘others’ in 
    comics. He states that it is more difficult to accurately depict 
    people of colours and ethnicities different from one’s own. If this 
    is true, and racism is not a factor, then it merely becomes even 
    more imperative to study these images, as they illustrate the image 
    that people had of ‘others’ at a particular time. However, Charles 
    Johnson, who writes the prologue for Stromberg’s book, disagrees. 
    He argues that the whole point of comic art, and art in general, is 
    to be able to take a look from behind the eyes of others. 
    Furthermore, he accuses those who simplify and stereotype their 
    illustrations of other races of ignorance, and intellectual and 
    creative laziness. He rejects the idea that artists were products 
    of their time, and that they should not be content to work with 
    pre-fabricated knowledge and projections that contribute to such 
    stereotyping (Johnson, 2003)
One artist who dramatically reinvented his work, going from 
    offensively stereotypical to incredibly accurate, was none other 
    than the legendary Hergé. The Belgian artist’s first four Tintin 
    adventures were awash with the sort of lazy stereotypes that 
    Charles Johnson accused twentieth century writers of. Despite being 
    bande dessinée 
    royalty, Tintin au pays 
    des Soviets, 
    Tintin au 
    Congo,
    Tintin en 
    Amerique, and 
    Les Cigares de 
    Pharoan, were heavily based on 
    stereotypes that readers had of these countries at that time. 
    However, everything changed when Hergé met Chinese art student, 
    Zhang Chongren. Just prior to the creation of the fifth Tintin 
    adventure, Chongren was a source of inspiration for Hergé that 
    revolutionised both the technical and political aspects of his 
    work, and by extension the work of countless 
    bande dessinée 
    artists that would follow Hergé’s example. Hergé’s newfound 
    interest in Chinese calligraphy would help develop his
    Ligne 
    Claire style of writing, which would 
    allow for more accurate depiction of people and environments. 
    Furthermore, Hergé’s friendship with Chongren would allow him to do 
    what Charles Johnson envisioned an artist should do – put oneself 
    behind the eyes of another. Entitled
    Le Lotus 
    Bleu, the fifth album turned out to be 
    the most accurate representation of far eastern culture at the 
    time. Hergé tacitly handled the tense political climate between 
    China and Japan during the build up to the second world war. The 
    album was so well done in fact, that Hergé was invited to China by 
    the Great Leader – Chiang Kai-shek. One could argue then, that 
    Le Lotus 
    Bleu is a rare example of accurate 
    Oriental discourse, produced by a westerner, but accepted by the 
    East. This example seems to vindicate Johnson’s argument that 
    artists should try harder to produce accurate and informed 
    depictions of others in bandes 
    dessinées. Hergé’s development of 
    Ligne 
    Claire refutes Stromberg’s defence of 
    illustrators that use artistic short-hand to portray others in 
    their art, and is complicit in Johnson’s condemnation of these 
    artists as creatively and intellectually lazy.
*Hergé, (1936) 
    Le 
    
    Lotus 
    Bleu
Hergé’s tactful representation of the Chinese is a rare 
    exception however, and is a stark contrast to images of Asians in 
    certain weekly The Wasp was a satirical magazine based in San 
    Francisco, and was notorious for its use of stereotypical 
    caricatures of Chinese-Americans. The two images below were 
    published in 1877 and 1881 respectively, around the time that 
    anti-Asian sentiments were running high in the 
    U.S. This was due to a large intake of 
    Chinese immigrants in the previous few decades, following a trade 
    agreement with China. Coincidentally, the states were in the midst 
    of an economic downturn at the time. Chinese immigrants, despite 
    their relatively low numbers compared to the American populace, 
    were an easy target for scapegoating, and accused of stealing 
    American jobs. This trend of blaming the Chinese for the economic 
    decline was known as ‘The Yellow Peril’, which became the tagline 
    for numerous racist caricatures.
*Unknown artist (1887) Unknown 
    Title

*Keller (1881) The Coming 
    Man
The first image is a play on the theory of evolution, suggesting 
    that Asians are subhuman and more related to pigs, monkeys, dogs 
    and rats. Published a century before Art Spiegelman’s 
    Maus, this image acts as a precursor to the 
    depiction of people as animals in comics. It is crude and 
    dehumanizing, and the polar opposite of Spiegelman’s work, which 
    despite using animals, made the characters somehow more human. The 
    second image is interesting, as it employs a level of detail 
    uncharacteristic of stereotypical depictions of Asians and others 
    in general. One can only assume that the artist went to great 
    lengths to emphasise the stereotypical physical features of Chinese 
    men in order to demonize them and instil fear in viewers. The 
    description in the article reads “The unsophisticated 
    Mongol, imitating, ape-like, his fellows of this country, attains a 
    monopoly of the cigar and laundry business, and smiles a cunning 
    smile of triumph at his discomforted rivals” (Stromberg, 
    2003:16).
In conclusion then, we can see from these images that 
    Orientalism and Othering are ever-present influences in western 
    comic art. Throughout the 19th and 20th centuries, 
    band dessiné 
    illustrators have often used artistic short-hand to depict races 
    other than their own, resulting in simplified and stereotypical 
    caricatures. Highly stylized and informed artists, such as Hergé 
    during the Blue Lotus period, can produce works that accurately and 
    tactfully depict their subjects, but such precision and devotion is 
    uncommon. As in Oriental and Colonial discourse, most portrayals of 
    others in bande dessiné rely on 
    scarce, questionable information that results in inaccurate and 
    often racist content. However, no matter what the quality or 
    accuracy, bande dessiné helps us 
    understand how Orientalism and the Other influenced western and 
    eastern society in the 19th and 20th centuries, as every drawn line 
    provides an idea of the thinking behind it.
References:
• Bhabha, H.K. (1994) The Location of 
    Culture, Routledge, London
• Hergé (1936) Le Lotus Bleu, Casterman, 
    Tournai
• Johnson, C. (2003) in Strömberg, F. (2003) 
    Black images in the Comics: A Visual History, 
    Fantagraphics Books, Seattle, Wash
• Keller, G.F. (1881) The Coming Man, The 
    Wasp, San Francisco,
• Said, E.W. (1978) Orientalism, Routledge 
    and Kegan Paul, London
• Strömberg, F. (2003) Black images in the Comics: A 
    Visual History, Fantagraphics Books, Seattle, Wash
• Strömberg, F. (2010) Comic Art Propaganda: A Graphic 
    History, IIex, Lewes, pp. 16-19
• Unknown (1877) Unknown, The Wasp, San Francisco

