1. Introduction
Due to its semi-enclosed morphology and shoaling bathymetry, the 
    North Sea experiences extreme wave conditions, in particular during 
    winter periods (Woolf et al., 2002). When combined with sea-level 
    surges such events can lead to damaging inundation of low-lying 
    coastal regions, due to wave overtopping of sea defences. 
    Development of a modelling and predictive capability for 
    high-resolution wave conditions in the North Sea is therefore a 
    high priority. However, the task is complicated due to interaction 
    between locally generated waves and incoming swell from outside the 
    region, and especially due to interactions between waves and tidal 
    currents.
Crossing, or bimodal, sea states occur between 5 and 40% of the 
    time in the North Sea (Guedes Soares, 1984). These are generated 
    when swell waves propagating into the region from distant storm 
    events interact with locally generated waves which may be of very 
    different direction, period, and height. Swell waves from the North 
    Atlantic and the Norwegian Sea propagate into the North Sea, 
    interacting with local wind-sea-generated waves, modifying the main 
    spectral parameters. The interaction between differing wave trains 
    is not fully understood, but crossing seas have been statistically 
    associated with freak wave incidence, and shipping accidents 
    (Waseda et al., 2011; Tamura et al., 2009; Cavaleri et al., 2012; 
    Onorato et al., 2006, 2010; Sabatino and Serio, 2015; Toffoli et 
    al., 2011a). The North Sea is particularly prone to rogue wave 
    events, such as the famous Draupner wave recorded in 1994 (Haver, 
    2004), the first ever recorded rogue wave event, that occurred in 
    crossing sea conditions (Adcock et al., 2011). In the paper, the 
    effect of the enhancement of the wind-sea waves due to swell is 
    assessed during storms.
In addition to crossing seas, wave–current interactions are a 
    well-known cause of wave height amplification or attenuation. 
    Wave–current interactions (WCIs) are depth- and current-induced 
    modification of wave features. A seminal study carried out by 
    Tolman (1991) highlighted that WCIs are significant in the North 
    Sea, changing the significant wave height 
    (Hs) and the mean wave 
    period (Tm) by 5 and 10 
    %, respectively, during storm periods. However, the model that was 
    used by Tolman (1991) to assess this effect was at very course 
    resolution and broad scale. In particular, the effect of the WCI in 
    the coastal shallow areas was not considered. Phillips (1977) 
    showed that in the absence of wave breaking, local wave amplitude 
    is given by

where A is the resulting wave amplitude, 
    A0 is the unperturbed 
    amplitude of the wave field, c is the wave phase 
    speed, and U is the current that interacts with 
    the wave train. It is important to notice that the sign of the 
    current is determinant on the effect of the WCI: if the current 
    travels in opposite direction with the wave train, there will be an 
    enhancement of the significant wave height. Conversely, if current 
    and waves are in the same direction, the 
    Hs decreases. For deep 
    water waves, the phase speed c depends only on 
    the period of the wave, while in shallow water c depends only on 
    the depth. Equation (1) shows that the waves travelling in a 
    direction opposing the current (U < 0) have a 
    positive ratio 
    A=A0 
    and consequently, an enhancement of the wave amplitude.
WCIs could also lead to the breaking of the wave: if the current 
    is strong enough to block the wave train (Ris and Holthuijsen, 
    1996), these waves can break and lose energy before arriving to the 
    coastline (Chawla and Kirby, 2002, 1998).
WCIs are particularly difficult to quantify empirically, and 
    computationally intensive to model. In addition, the WCIs are a 
    well-known mechanism for the formation of rogue waves in the ocean: 
    the Agulhas current, that flows near the coastline of South Africa, 
    was one of the first places in which this mechanism was identified 
    (Mallory, 1974; Lavrenov, 1998; Lavrenov and Porubov, 2006). 
    Recently, many studies (Onorato et al., 2011; Toffoli et al., 2013, 
    2015; Shrira and Slunyaev, 2014; Ma et al., 2013) highlighted that 
    the interaction between a train of waves with an adverse current 
    could increase its wave steepness, and cause rogue waves due to the 
    modulational instability (Benjamin and Feir, 1967). However, it is 
    clear that shallow coastal waters, embayments, and headlands are 
    particular foci for interactions (Hearn et al., 1987; Signell et 
    al., 1990a). Model studies have concentrated on comparing wave 
    height and period in coupled and uncoupled model versions showing, 
    for example, 3% difference in wave height and 20% in wave period in 
    the Dutch and German coastal waters of the North Sea (Osuna and 
    Monbaliu, 2004). Similar results have been obtained for coastal 
    waters of the Adriatic during bora conditions (Benetazzo et al., 
    2013), finding a maximum reduction for the 
    Hs of 0.6m in the central 
    Adriatic and a simultaneous increase up to 0.5m in the gulfs of 
    Trieste and Venice. WCIs were also studied during hurricane 
    conditions off the eastern seaboard of the USA (Xie et al., 
    2008).
Sea defences of coastal settlements along the northeast coast of 
    Scotland have suffered several damaging events during the period 
    2009–2014 as a result of surges and waves. The coastal waters are 
    dominated by strong tidal currents and wind-driven residuals, are 
    exposed to wave trains entering the North Sea from the north, and 
    generated by storm events in the central and southern North Sea. 
    Although the oceanography of the North Sea as a whole has been 
    intensively studied since the 1830s (Whewell, 1830; Proudman and 
    Doodson, 1924; Dietrich, 1950; Huthnance, 1991; Otto et al., 1990), 
    and the region was one of the earliest to be subjected to 
    computational hydrodynamic modelling (Flather, 1987; Davies et al., 
    1985), high-resolution modelling activity has been largely 
    concentrated in areas with potential for wave and tidal energy 
    extraction (Adcock et al., 2013; Bryden and Couch, 2006; Baston and 
    Harris, 2011; Shields et al., 2011, 2009). However, there are no 
    such models for the northeast coast of mainland Scotland, and none 
    which include coupled WCIs. Our objective here was to develop and 
    test such a model for the stretch of coastline between the Firth of 
    Tay and Peterhead, centred on the strategically important port city 
    of Aberdeen and the town of Stonehaven (Fig. 1). The latter is the 
    base for a governmentally supported marine monitoring site with a 
    > 15-year time series of high-resolution data on a wide range of 
    environmental parameters (Bresnan et al., 2009).
2 Materials and methods
The MIKE by DHI model was used to simulate the tidaland
wind-driven circulation, and the wave propagation. The MIKE 
    software is composed of different modules, for the creation of a 
    model grid and input files and to simulate different hydrodynamical 
    features at the same time or separately.
The following modules were used:
– The MIKE Zero modules for generating the computational grid 
    and the input files.
– The MIKE 3 FM module for simulating the tidal and the 
    wind-driven circulation.
– The MIKE 21 SW module for modelling the wave propagation.
For the simulation of the WCIs, a one-way coupling between MIKE 
    3 FM and MIKE 21 SW was set up. The depth average flow fields and 
    the water level output from MIKE 3 FM was provided as input to the 
    MIKE 21 SW model.
2.1 The computational grid
Both MIKE 3 FM and MIKE 21 SW use an unstructured grid approach, 
    with triangular elements (Ferziger and Perić,
 Figure 1. The area 
    studied in the present paper.
 Figure 2. The 
    computational grid generated with MIKE Zero software.
2002). Unstructured grids can represent complex coastlines 
    better than a rectangular grid and potentially provide more 
    realistic flows, enabling the geography of the coastline to affect 
    the propagation of tidal and surface waves in a realistic manner. 
    In addition, triangular grid elements allow smoothly changing cell 
    sizes across a region, with the highest resolution concentrated in 
    an area of particular interest. The mesh for the area of study is 
    shown in Fig. 2. An enhanced-resolution area was created near 
    Stonehaven, because this work is part of a wider study focusing on 
    the resuspension of the sediments in this part of the domain. This 
    high-resolution area also covered the Firth of Forth and the 
    Aberdeenshire coastline, where previous studies have shown enhanced 
    currents due to interaction between the tidal wave and the Scottish 
    coastline (Dietrich, 1950; Otto et al., 1990).
2.2 The MIKE 3 FM hydrodynamic model
MIKE 3 FM (flow model) is based on the numerical solution of the 
    3-D incompressible Reynolds-averaged Navier–Stokes equations, under 
    the Boussinesq and the hydrostatic pressure approximations (DHI, 
    2011a). The spatial discretization of the primitive equations is 
    performed using a cell-centred finite-volume method. In the 
    finite-volume method the volume integrals in the partial 
    differential equations with a divergence are converted to surface 
    integrals using the Gauss– Ostrogradsky theorem (Toro, 2009).
MIKE 3 FM has a flexible approach for simulating the flow in the 
    water column. It is possible to choose between sigma layers (Song 
    and Haidvogel, 1994), z layers, and coupled 
    sigma and z layers. For our purpose we decided 
    to use the equidistant sigma layers approach, because the 
    bathymetry of the area was not sufficiently complex to require a 
    more accurate description with a coupled sigma and 
    z layer that would be extremely computationally 
    expensive. Sigma layers are also useful for resolving the water 
    column well throughout the tidal cycle, given the large tidal 
    range.
The coupled sigma and z layers were tested, 
    but there was no significant improvement for simulating the flow. 
    For the horizontal eddy viscosity the formulation proposed by 
    Smagorinsky (1963) was used, in which the sub-gridscale transport 
    is expressed by an effective eddy viscosity related to a 
    characteristic length scale rather than a constant eddy viscosity. 
    This sub-grid-scale viscosity is given by

where cs is the 
    Smagorinsky constant, l is the characteristic length of the grid 
    size, and the deformation rate is given by (Lilly, 1966; Deardorff, 
    1971; Smagorinsky, 1963)

The bed resistance was parameterized using a constant quadratic 
    drag coefficient cf . The 
    average bottom stress is determined by a quadratic friction law:

where  ̄ub is the 
    average flow velocity above the bottom and p0 is 
    the density of the water. The value of the above parameters chosen 
    for the model are reported in Sect. 3.1. The model was forced with 
    a time series of tidal elevations at the open boundaries from the 
    open-source OSU (Oregon State University) Tidal Prediction Software 
    (OTPS) (Egbert et al., 2010), based on TOPEX satellite observation 
    of the water-level observations interpolated with tide gauge data 
    from the European shelf region. In order to take account of the 
    wind-driven circulation and surge in the model, meteorological 
    forcing was applied across the model domain, using the ERA-Interim 
    reanalysis for wind velocity and mean sealevel pressure (Dee et 
    al., 2011).
2.3 The MIKE 21 SW wave model
The MIKE 21 SW (spectral wave) is an unstructured grid model for 
    wave prediction and analysis (DHI, 2011b). The MIKE 21 SW is based 
    on the wave action conservation equation (Komen et al., 1996; 
    Young, 1999), where the dependent variable is the 
    frequency-directional wave action spectrum. This is given by

where S is the energy source term, defined 
    as

that depends on the energy transfer from the wind to the wave 
    field Sin, on the 
    nonlinear wave–wave interaction 
    Snl, on the dissipation 
    due to depth-induced wave breaking 
    Ssurf, on the dissipation 
    due to bottom friction 
    Sbot, and on the 
    dissipation caused by the white-capping 
    Sds.
