2. CASE STUDY
2.1 3D Digital Documentation of The Heart of Neolithic 
    Orkney and Cultural Heritage Applications
The World Heritage Site in Orkney covers a unique cultural 
    landscape, dating back approximately 5,000 years. One of the main 
    sites within this landscape is Skara Brae, a Neolithic village 
    comprising individual domestic housing. It is the best preserved 
    group of prehistoric houses in Western Europe. The chambered tomb 
    at Maeshowe is significant not only as a Neolithic monumental 
    masterpiece and the finest example of its kind in NW Europe, but 
    also for its fantastic collection of 
    12th century Viking inscriptions, the 
    interior walls being covered with graffiti runes and other 
    carvings. Stone circles and standing stones complete the current 
    World Heritage inscription.
The sites are conserved and managed by Historic Scotland, the 
    Scottish government agency charged with safeguarding the 
    nations heritage and 
    promoting its enjoyment and understanding for future generations. 
    In August 2010, the Centre for Digital Documentation and 
    Visualisation working in partnership with Historic Scotland 
    undertook a comprehensive 3D survey of all sites within the World 
    Heritage zone.
2.2 Objectives
The objectives of the project were numerous:
• Generate a highly accurate digital 3D survey.
• Develop an interpretation and education tool, based on virtual 
    reality reconstructions.
• Visual aid to understanding construction phases of 
    structures.
• Conservation aid.
• Condition monitoring.
• Coastal erosion monitoring.
• Promote public engagement and partnership working.
• Allow virtual access to remote and inaccessible sites.
• Develop and promote virtual tourism.
3. METHODOLOGY
Airborne LiDAR data and ortho-rectified photography was 
    collected for the entire World Heritage zone at 0.5m resolution 
    with imagery in 24-bit colour.
Terrestrial laser scanning (TLS) is now a well-established 
    method for large-scale heritage documentation (e.g. Bedford and 
    Papworth 2009, Lerma et al. 2010, Wilson 
    et al. 2010). TLS was therefore the principal 
    survey technique used at each main site, and was carried out at 
    5-10mm resolution using a combination of time-of-flight and 
    phase-based scanners (Leica ScanStation 2 and C10 and Leica 
    HDS6100). Closed-loop traverses provided an accuracy of ±2mm for 
    each site. Additional scans were registered to the primary point 
    cloud using high definition surveying (HDS) targets. TLS data 
    collection was augmented by digital total station surveys (Leica 
    TCRA 1105+) and GPS data collection (Leica GNSS 1200+ receiver) to 
    fully georeference the point clouds. High-resolution 360° panoramic 
    photography was obtained from each scan location using a Nikon D3X 
    camera with Nikon 12mm lens and a Nodal Ninja mount to enable 
    photo-mapping directly onto the point cloud.
Triangulation laser scanners were used for sub-mm close-range 
    capture of carvings and inscriptions (Hexagon Romer arm with 
    Perceptron Scanworks v5 laser scanner and Konica-Minolta Vivid 
    9i).
Data processing is currently in progress on this project, but 
    some initial results are given here. The project utilises Leica 
    Cyclone, Leica GeoOffice, TheoLt (using the TheoNetAdjust 
    functionality), Polyworks and 3D Studio Max software packages. All 
    datasets will be combined and used within a GIS environment (using 
    ArcGIS).
4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
4.1 Skara Brae
Skara Brae village is situated in very close proximity to the 
    North Sea. It consists of a complex system of small houses 
    interlinked by passageways and tunnel systems (Figure 1). The site 
    has been fully documented in 3D and georeferenced, with an overall 
    point cloud accuracy of ±6mm.
 Figure 1. Aerial photo of Skara Brae, 
    showing close network of houses and proximity of site to coastline 
    © P. and M. Snodin 2009.
Recording
Generating an accurate survey record for the site was an 
    important priority for Historic Scotland. Since the village is 
    composed of numerous low and narrow passages, some very difficult 
    to access, the site has never been mapped in its entirety. The team 
    were able to position the Leica HDS6100 and C10 scanners in 
    crevices and passageways too small for a person to fit, thus 
    obtaining a comprehensive map (Figure 2).
 Figure 2. Point cloud showing plan view 
    of Skara Brae village, coloured by intensity values © CDDV 2010.
The registered point cloud data will be utilised in facilities 
    management of the site, allowing accurate dimensions to be taken 
    and assisting with planning and implementation of ongoing 
    conservation and maintenance works.
Monitoring
Coastal erosion is a critical heritage management issue at this 
    site. A defensive sea wall has been installed and TLS included 
    recording of this wall from the shoreline (Figure 3). Permanent 
    survey markers were installed for the TLS work, allowing for 
    regular repeat scans and monitoring of coastal erosion.
 Figure 3. Sea wall defences visible in 
    TLS data from Skara Brae, as recorded from the shoreline and 
    coloured by intensity values © CDDV 2010.
This initial dataset will act as a baseline and subsequent 
    recording will be carried out at defined time intervals. 
    Digitisation of the sea wall defences will be of assistance in 
    quantifying any future erosion (Figure 4). Conservation 
    intervention will take place when and where necessary.
 Figure 4. Digitisation of sea wall 
    defences from TLS data © CDDV 2011.
Airborne LiDAR data will also be useful for monitoring longterm 
    and large-scale coastal erosion. The coastal topographic data 
    collected for this project will serve as a baseline. LiDAR data in 
    XYZ format was meshed to form a polygonal model, then high 
    resolution aerial photography was UVW mapped onto this surface, as 
    shown in Figure 5. The model was then rendered using a direct 
    shadow casting light to emphasise topological change in the 
    terrain.
 Figure 5. Model from airborne LiDAR 
    data showing site and coastal defenses at Skara Brae © CDDV 
    2011.
Remote sensing techniques such as LiDAR are well-regarded 
    methodologies for archaeological site or feature identification 
    (e.g. Crutchley 2010, Devereux et al. 2005, 
    2008). LiDAR data will therefore be interrogated with a view to 
    identifying potential new archaeological sites within the World 
    Heritage Zone. The area is extremely rich in Neolithic and later 
    heritage and much undoubtedly remains to be discovered.
Visualisation
Virtual reconstruction of the village, based on the accurate 3D 
    survey data will enable visitors, both on site and remote, to view 
    the village in its original appearance and to observe different 
    construction phases. House 7 within the village is the best 
    preserved and to maintain this condition, the house has been roofed 
    over and visitor access prohibited. The TLS data and its 
    interpretative visualisation will allow virtual access to this 
    space without compromising conservation and maintenance plans 
    (Figures 6, 7). High-resolution photography will be mapped onto the 
    model surfaces to create virtual tours of the as-built structures, 
    while virtual reconstructions will make use of archaeological 
    evidence.
