1.2. Development Workflows
In the field of Instructional design (ID) there are a number of 
    frameworks that are useful when developing elearning content. These 
    range from ID design approaches and implementations, to models of 
    evaluation. A common elearning design approach used at RGU is the 
    traditional stage-based ADDIE approach [8]. The workflow of an 
    ADDIE project follows a step-wise workflow from Analysis, to design 
    and development then implementation and finally evaluation. In this 
    manner, ADDIE project progression is often depicted as water 
    flowing serially down a single staircase. Development projects 
    typically take place in response to an identified learning need and 
    are staffed with elearning support personnel partnered with 
    experts, commonly lecturers, in the target field.
The needs are diagnosed for the learner and a complete solution 
    is implemented. In-house staff have found ADDIE-based projects to 
    work well for large scale changes scheduled during student breaks 
    or major course redevelopments, however it is less suited to 
    term-time developments where staff resources are spread thin due to 
    concurrent teaching and general learning support demands.
Whilst having reduced development time during semesters, there 
    is a general high availability of potential test users. Utilising 
    students as a resource, allows development projects to follow a 
    rapid prototyping methodology [9]. This method involves iterative 
    developmental steps that utilise early feedback received from both 
    the student learners and tutor stakeholders. Development loosely 
    follows ADDIE steps but in spiral workflow with each successive 
    loop a self-contained output item with increasing functional 
    complexity.
As a complement to the iterative nature of the development 
    process, an adapted just-in-time teaching approach was chosen to 
    develop a resource which met current needs, but inherently 
    contained capacity to be extended. Just-in-time teaching is a 
    combination of classroom and web-based training introduced by 
    Physics Professor Gregor Novak as a solution to falling engagement 
    within his science classes [10]. In order to maximise the 
    efficiency of a classroom session with human instructors, Novak 
    designed a web-based learning component intended for students to 
    review outside the classroom prior to attending their lessons. 
    Review can take place at any time convenient for the learner, and 
    can therefore be subjectively viewed as “in my own time” or “just 
    for me” learning by the learner [11]. The web component was split 
    in to WarmUps, typically thought-provoking 
    background information of a given classroom topic and 
    Puzzles relating the background information 
    presented [12,13]. As part of a feedback loop, students were 
    invited to give their feedback on the web component to help the 
    teacher build a so-called active learner 
    classroom. Here, the teacher is expected to take the 
    feedback onboard and adjust the teaching accordingly.
During our learning intervention, an engaging just-in-time 
    teaching approach was employed using the web activity usage 
    statistics, word-of-mouth and open-entry reflective comments as 
    feedback to inform classroom learning.
2. Methodology: Project Development
There were 3 phases to this project; (1) design and development 
    of the core elearing object, 
    (2) completion and implementation of an elearning activity, and (3) 
    overall evaluation of any change effects upon use of the module 
    elearning content. The sample group was 146 first year 
    undergraduate (2011/2012) MPharm students undertaking the SCQF 7 
    (Pharmaceutical Biology) and SCQF 8 (Integrative Physiology) 
    modules.
2.1. Phase 1: Development of Core Elearning Elements—A 3D 
    Virtual Arm
The open source 3D tool “MakeHuman” was used to create a 
    gender-neutral human form (Figure 1) as a 3D mesh (MakeHuman.org, 
    Giulianova, Italy) [14].
Using the 3D CAD package Blender 2.5 (Stichting Blender 
    Foundation, Amsterdam, Netherlands) [15], the full human form was 
    reduced to a core arm template The majority 
    of the time allowance for core development was devoted to this 
    stage of the project with no iterative feedback required. Expertise 
    in 3D mesh editing and texturising was required as was anatomical 
    expertise to reproduce a simplified internal skin structure 
    depicting different skin layers.
From the complete limb, an arm was extracted from the 3D mesh 
    and a representative cross section “block” imported into the 
    free-to-use package Trimble SketchUp (Trimble Navigation, 
    Sunnyvale, CA, USA) [16] formally Google SketchUp (Google, Mountain 
    View, CA, USA). In both phases, development time was monitored at 
    each stage.
Figure 1. 3D Virtual Arm template 
    creation.

2.2. Phase 2: Design and Implementation of the Learning 
    Activity
The virtual arm 3D object was edited and formed into an 
    elearning activity. Using organic modeling tools with the SketchUp 
    application 3D features of various skin lesions were re-created 
    from 2D photographs and each added and saved as separate instances 
    of the main template. (Trimble Navigation, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) [16] 
    Open-source rendering software Kerkythea was used to create a 
    series of angular “shots” of each block section (Solid Iris 
    Technologies, Attiki, Greece) [17].
Each set of shots were processed using commercial Adobe Flash 
    software to create a 3D object tour [18], a common feature 
    typically viewed on product websites to virtually rotate a given 
    product. This allowed students to manipulate the area under review 
    and to identify the specific skin layers involved. Areas of each 
    lesion example were labeled and all objects embedded into the 
    commercial Articulate™ elearning development package (Figure 2). 
    Once added to the Articulate™ software (Articulate, New York, NY, 
    USA) [19], further photographs, text descriptions with voice over, 
    and quiz elements were added.
Prior to using the “virtual arm”, clear and concise instructions 
    for using the presentation were provided. To ensure students had 
    the opportunity to assess their learning they were provided with 
    appropriate feedback and a quiz evolved including “fun” tasks such 
    as a sequence, spell and visual test. If a student achieved a 
    correct answer they were immediately “rewarded” with a “round of 
    applause”. The students 
    score was still provided at the end of the quiz together with the 
    pass rate of 80%.
Figure 2. Skin legions activity created and 
    embedded using presentation tool.

2.3. Phase 3: Evaluation
Kirkpatrick’s 1998 four-level model was adapted to help 
    structure the qualitative and quantitative data collected for 
    evaluation [20]. An updated description of Kirkpatrick’s model that 
    includes elearning considerations and a fifth-level to examine 
    return of investment or ROI [21] was used. Levels 1 to 3 (Reaction, 
    Learning and behavior), embody a subjective form of evaluation 
    which were combined with the more objective levels 4 to 5, namely 
    Results and Return of Investment (ROI).
Level 1: Reaction. The first evaluation level of Kirpatrick’s 
    model is Learner Reaction [20]. Data at this level gauges initial 
    impressions using a quick form of feedback. Reaction to the 
    material was gauged via discussions in-lecture and practical 
    sessions. This also acted to verify the accessibility and 
    functionality of the learning object’s final stage of 
    prototyping.
Level 2: Learning. At level 2, our evaluation moves to a 
    comparison between the personal learning experiences of the 
    students and the intended goals. Views of personal learning were 
    obtained from portfolio reflections following ethical approval from 
    the RGU ethics committee. Students were asked on a voluntary basis 
    to reflect on their learning experience as part of their 
    e-portfolio and share these reflections.
Level 3: Behavior. Behavior seeks to determine the success in 
    meeting the organisational goals, and identifying the strengths and 
    weaknesses in the training process. Behavior was gauged by looking 
    at how reflective comments such as those detailing how learner 
    actions were effected by the presence of the Virtual Arm 
    activity.
Level 4: Results. Results in the context of the Kirkpatick model 
    produce the most clear quantitative evidence of meeting the 
    training goals [20]. Data was obtained from overall Multiple Choice 
    Question (MCQ) results produced from student assessment.
Level 5: Return of investment (ROI). The ROI is a performance 
    measure which is best suited to financial comparisons between what 
    is spent to and what is obtained from any given intervention. This 
    metric helps stakeholders determine whether the project can be 
    repeated efficiently. Whilst staff hours translating to a financial 
    value were logged during the project, student outcomes are less 
    easily quantifiable in cash terms at the departmental level. The 
    equation to determine ROI in terms of financial efficiency is given 
    as:
ROI = (Gain of investment (£) − Cost of investment (£))/Cost of 
    investment (1)
The authors propose an ROI that can measure efficiency based on 
    use of existing and novel materials as measured by development 
    time. The development and implementation of the 3D object was 
    conducted in 2 phases, (1) the creation of the reusable core 
    object, and (2) the customisation of the core object onto an 
    elearning activity. Materials efficiency can then be measured as a 
    percentage of the total time investment that can be reused for 
    projects that require the same resources, therefore:
ROI materials = (Time spent creating 
    reusable template/time spent creating entire object) × 100 (2)
Whilst this ROI approach does not deliver a generic cash-based 
    comparison with other projects, standalone efficiency is still 
    represented in terms of creating further developments from the 
    existing core 3D object.
3. Results and Discussion
3.1. Use of the Virtual Arm alongside Existing 
    Elearning
Pharmacy students require an appreciation of the structure and 
    function of the integumentary system and not simply its role as a 
    defence mechanism. A pilot learning object branded “The Virtual 
    Arm” based on supportive immune and integumentary system notes for 
    the SCQF level 8 (Integrative Physiology) courseworks was designed 
    as described above and instigated as a new component during the 
    courseworks. Articulate™ Presenter software was used to design a 
    supportive presentation around material covered in the courseworks 
    but also to introduce new material to the students. Supplemental to 
    the 3D Virtual Arm object, Articulate™ Engage (Articulate, New 
    York, NY, USA) was used to develop in-depth introductions to the 
    immune and integumentary systems [19]. Articulate™ Quiz maker 
    software (Articulate, New York, NY, USA) was used to design a 
    revision quiz for both immune and the integumentary systems [19]. 
    The pass rate for all quizzes was set at 80% and this information 
    was shown to the students together with their own score at the end 
    of the quiz. All questions were randomised as was the order in 
    which the descriptors and key were presented to students. No 
    restrictions were put on access and all e-learning materials were 
    available to students either on or off campus throughout the course 
    of the module.
An external software package, from the University of California, 
    the Ouchterlony simulation was also used in this project [22]. 
    Together with an adapted feedback presentation these illustrated 
    one of the major concepts of the immune system, antigen-antibody 
    interaction. Various mammalian and avian antibody/antigen 
    combinations were used to place the information into context. In 
    addition to the elearning materials appropriate articles from 
    healthcare journals were used to enhance 
    students learning 
    [23].
