1. Introduction
In this paper, we review gamma-ray spectroscopy as a survey tool 
    for geothermal resource exploration. We hope the paper will also be 
    useful as a practical guide for those unfamiliar with gamma-ray 
    surveying, who might benefit from using it in geothermal 
    exploration.
Gamma-ray spectroscopy allows determination of concentrations of 
    selected radioelements from which the heat being produced from 
    radioactive decay can be calculated. This may be by counting 
    gamma-rays produced either in a rock sample during a laboratory 
    test or an area of land during an in-situ 
    survey. However, the relationship between recorded gamma fluence 
    and radioelemental concentration in the geosphere is complex. 
    Factors such as decay series disequilibria, topographical errors, 
    and atmospheric influence during surveying can lead to results that 
    are not representative of the underlying rock. The radioelements of 
    interest for geothermal resources are potassium (K), uranium (U), 
    and thorium (Th). Rocks of high concentrations of these 
    radioelements can be characterised by high heat flow, and the 
    geothermal gradient can thus be favourably enhanced. Such 
    enhancement creates useable heat at shallower depths than would 
    otherwise be the case, thus reducing the drilling costs of a 
    geothermal project.
Many granites are enriched in the radioelements potassium, 
    thorium and uranium, and thus typically have higher radioactivity 
    than many other rocks. Granite is therefore a favoured target in 
    geothermal exploration worldwide, e.g., USA [1], Japan [2], UK [3], 
    France [4], Switzerland [5], Australia [6]. This heat producing 
    property of granite is particularly effective when the pluton is 
    buried beneath layers of low heat conductivity “duvet rocks” such 
    as coal or shale [7]. There can be crossover between 
    classifications of duvet rocks and caprocks 
    (i.e., reservoir topseals), where the rocks both 
    have low thermal conductivity and permeability. However, some 
    potential duvet rocks such as the Clyde Plateau Lavas in the 
    Midland Valley of Scotland would likely not be effective caprocks, 
    in this case due to extensive fracturing. Where such duvet rocks 
    cap highly radiogenic granite, vastly enhanced heat can be obtained 
    [8,9,10]. Radiogenic heat production is not just a phenomenon 
    peculiar to granite as all rocks contain some concentration of 
    radio-elements. Depending on the depositional environment, 
    mudstones can have elevated concentrations of radio-elements 
    compared to other sedimentary rocks. Due to their low thermal 
    conductivities (because of their low quartz content) this heat can 
    remain in place within mudstones over geological time, which may 
    result in viable geothermal resources. Metamorphic rocks, on the 
    other hand, tend to be depleted in radio-elements [11,12]; such 
    depletion is actually part of the process that feeds the upper 
    crust with relatively higher concentrations of radioelements 
    [13].
Within geothermal exploration, gamma-ray surveying can be put to 
    a number of uses beyond heat production investigations. In 
    geothermal investigations, gamma-ray surveying is also useful for 
    fracture identification. Fractures in the subsurface have 
    previously been associated with elevated uranium concentrations 
    [14,15] due to the mobility of uranium in subsurface fluid 
    circulation. Such mobility can cause a significant issue for 
    gamma-ray spectrometry survey interpretation known as 
    disequilibrium (discussed in Section 4.2). Fractures can be a 
    source of significantly enhanced permeability [15,16,17] providing 
    key conduits for fluid extraction in a geothermal system; thus, it 
    is advantageous to accurately characterise the fluid flow 
    properties of a fracture network during resource evaluation. The 
    duvet layers of low heat conduction, e.g., mudstone, can also be 
    detected by their higher gamma-ray output compared to surrounding 
    formations. These gamma-ray counts show up during wire-line logging 
    of boreholes.
Gamma-ray surveying also has a wide range of applications beyond 
    geothermal exploration including: uranium exploration [18,19], 
    sedimentary facies identification for oil and gas exploration 
    [20,21,22], detection of radioactive contamination [23,24], and 
    mineral exploration [25]. It can also be used for pure earth 
    science discoveries, e.g., constraining deep crustal processes from 
    potassium, uranium, and thorium concentrations in modern day 
    outcrops [26,27].
2. Revision of Physical Concepts
2.1. Gamma-ray Formation and Detection
Gamma-ray is the name generally given to high-energy photons 
    emitted during decay of atomic nuclei. Gamma-rays have frequencies 
    greater than 1019 Hz, wavelengths less 
    than 10−12 m, and have energies above 
    104 eV; gamma-rays are generally the 
    highest energy photons in the electro-magnetic spectrum. 
    Radioelements spontaneously decay leading to emission of alpha, 
    beta, and/or gamma radiation depending on the decaying element. 
    These radio-elements are naturally present in most rocks, but tend 
    to be concentrated at higher levels in certain types (e.g., 
    granite, mudstone). Potassium, uranium, and thorium are of 
    particular interest for geothermal production because they 
    contribute significantly to the heat produced during radioactive 
    decay in the rock. The concentrations of these elements show an 
    approximate trend to increase with silica content [28]; the same 
    relationship has been found for gamma ray intensity in volcanic 
    rocks [29].
Gamma-rays penetrate through materials (e.g., rock and air) much 
    further than the other forms of radiation (alpha or beta). This 
    penetrating ability is what makes gamma-rays useful for detecting 
    radioelement concentrations within rock. They can penetrate up to 
    0.5 m through rock, allowing a sample to be collected by a portable 
    gamma-surveyor which is large enough to not be grossly biased by 
    local concentration heterogeneity. However, the half-length of a 
    gamma-ray in rock such as granite is much less than 0.5 m; 
    half-length is the distance through a material where half the 
    gamma-rays will be attenuated. During an in-situ survey, most of 
    the gamma-rays detected will effectively come from the top 0.15 m 
    of material. For example, a portable detector placed on a rock 
    surface will sample gamma-rays from approximately a 0.15 m deep by 
    1.0 m diameter disc (Figure 1); with a small contribution from 
    deeper sources. Penetration through air can be up to several 
    hundreds of metres; therefore, aerial surveys are typically 
    conducted 30–300 m above the surface [30,31]. Although the 
    penetrating property of gamma rays allow surveys to be conducted, 
    having most gamma radiation coming from the top 0.15 m at the 
    surface does present problems. Aerial surveys (explained in Section 
    3) sample a wide area during each reading; such a sample may be a 
    mixture of bare rock, peat cover, and water courses. The portion of 
    the measured gamma-rays that originated from bare rock can be a 
    significant uncertainty when interpreting the results. A further 
    issue is weathering can alter the concentration of potassium, 
    uranium, and thorium at the rock surface [28]. These issues can be 
    compensated for by calibrating aerial results with direct surveying 
    of a freshly created rock surface or testing borehole samples in 
    the laboratory [32,33].
 Figure 1. 
    Schematic showing approximate areas of rock sampled by portable 
    gamma surveyor placed on rock surface. 
The concentrations of specific radioelements can be determined 
    as they each impart a specific energy signature onto the photon 
    produced during decay. The isotope 40K 
    produces photons with energy of 1.46 MeV. However, uranium and 
    thorium are detected by their daughter products; therefore, uranium 
    and thorium concentrations are detected as equivalent uranium (eU) 
    and equivalent thorium (eTh). The early spectrometers used the 
    daughter products 214Bi (1.76 MeV) for 
    uranium and 208Tl (2.62 MeV) for 
    thorium. These daughter products were originally used because their 
    produced gamma-ray energy signatures are relatively large (e.g., 
    0.8 MeV for Bi214 compared with 0.2 MeV 
    for U235 or no gamma-ray produced for 
    U238) and can be more easily 
    distinguished. Modern spectrometers are not limited to solely these 
    daughter products to estimate eU and eTh as improvements in 
    spectrometers means that many of the lines in the uranium or 
    thorium decay series can be distinguished. This allows adequate 
    confidence in estimates of potassium, uranium, and thorium derived 
    from gamma-ray sources. Additionally, Compton Scattering affects 
    gamma-rays as they pass through rock due to gamma-rays “bouncing 
    off” electrons which absorb some of the energy from the gamma-ray. 
    This Compton Scattering means that when a photon is detected by the 
    surveyor it may have much less energy than when it was created 
    during decay. This diminishing energy results in photons created by 
    thorium decay arriving at the detector with energy expected from 
    uranium or potassium decay, in addition to U photons arriving with 
    the expected potassium decay energy. However, these scattering 
    affects can be compensated for in spectral analysis.
The photoelectric effect [34,35] is utilised to detect 
    gamma-rays [36] with many detectors made from material which 
    undergo scintillation; i.e., visible light is 
    produced when struck by gamma-rays (the use of this effect is 
    described further in Section 3). Detectors made from sodium-iodine 
    are typically used in in-situ surveys [20,26,37,38]. Many other 
    materials are used for scintillators such as bismuth germinate; 
    ceasium-iodide detectors may also be used but these have poor 
    resolution. Alternatively, lanthanum bromide detectors provide good 
    resolution but have self-dose issues; cerium bromide has less 
    self-dose problems but remains expensive. Also in use are 
    semiconductor detectors such as intrinsic germanium. This is used 
    for lab studies as it requires cryogenic cooling. 
2.2. Heat Production from Radioelements
The heat from radioactive decay is produced in accordance with 
    the well-known Einsteinian expression E = mc2 
    [39]. This summarises the fact that energy cannot be created or 
    destroyed, but mass can be converted into energy and vice-versa. 
    During the decay processes, some mass must be converted into the 
    energy that produces the heat. Initially, this energy exists in the 
    form of the emitted particle’s kinetic energy. During subsequent 
    collisions, this energy is absorbed and converted to heat.
It is important to note that, although gamma-rays are used to 
    determine the quantities of potassium, uranium, and thorium in 
    rock, the gamma-rays themselves are not actually responsible for 
    significant quantities of the heat produced. Alpha and Beta 
    components of decay produce much more heat than gamma-rays; in 
    particular, the alpha decay of uranium [40]. Such heat producing 
    decays come from different parts of the decay series to the 
    detected gamma-rays, thus disequilibrium of the decay series 
    (further discussed in Section 4.2) can lead to radioelemental 
    concentrations that do not represent the radiogenic heat being 
    produced by the rock. Neutrinos are also produced during decay but 
    pass through the planet, thus some energy of the Earth is lost to 
    outer space [41].
3. Instrumentation
Several different types of gamma spectrometers can be used 
    in-situ in the field or laboratory, but all share a common basic 
    architecture (Figure 2). Detectors are either based on 
    scintillation or semiconductors. Scintillation detectors consist of 
    both a scintillator and photomultiplier. The scintillator is made 
    out of material which reacts with gamma-ray photons producing 
    photons of visible light. The visible light forces electrons to be 
    ejected from the photomultiplier which are then multiplied [42]. 
    The electrons strike an anode, which produces a negative voltage 
    pulse which is proportional to the energy of the photon which 
    struck the scintillator. This proportionality is how the energy can 
    be determined by the spectral analyzer and thus the origin of the 
    gamma-ray can be determined. Semiconductor detectors are diodes in 
    which incident radiation generates electron-hole pairs which 
    migrate to electrodes due to a high voltage across the diode. This 
    produces a current pulse proportional to the energy deposited by 
    the incident radiation.
 Figure 2. Block 
    diagram showing the main sections which are common to most 
    gamma-ray spectrometers. Figure adapted from International Atomic 
    Energy Agency (IAEA) 2003 report [42]. 
Many geothermal exploration studies utilise lab-based 
    gamma-spectrometers. These gamma-spectrometers can be very precise, 
    such as intrinsic germanium semiconductor counters. They deliver 
    reliable results because they can be regularly checked against 
    standards and the surrounding environment remains largely stable. 
    To conduct the gamma readings, a sample of approximately 100 g is 
    crushed (less material may be used for more highly radioactive 
    samples). The crushed sample is then put in the chamber with the 
    counter; the chamber being housed in minimizes influences of 
    externally created gamma rays. Lab techniques are often used during 
    geothermal drilling since small drill cutting samples can be used 
    for the analysis. Using the drill cuttings has the advantage that 
    drilling does not have to be interrupted for wire-line logging to 
    gain data about the heat production of the geothermal exploration 
    target rocks. Laboratory measurements have typical errors of 
    0.03%–0.1% K, 0.5–2 ppm eU, and 0.1–0.3 ppm eTh [42].
