1. Introduction
Geothermal energy is thermal energy produced naturally in the 
    planetary interior [1,2], principally by the decay of radioisotopes 
    of potassium, uranium and thorium [3]. As such, it is the only 
    renewable energy source independent of solar radiation and/or the 
    gravitational attraction of the sun and moon [4]. Since time 
    immemorial, geothermal energy emerging at the earth’s surface as 
    natural hot springs has been instinctively harnessed by human 
    beings—and indeed other animals, most famously the macaque (snow 
    monkeys) of Japan [5]—as a source of comfort and cleansing. For 
    instance, in the ancient Roman Empire, few natural hot springs were 
    overlooked for their potential to service the hot water demands of 
    the public baths that were such an indispensable part of army life 
    and wider Roman culture [2]. Natural thermal springs have also long 
    been used for laundry purposes, and even for cooking. All of these 
    uses—together with space heating and various industrial heating 
    applications—are instances of direct use of geothermal resources 
    [6].
The only other, indirect, use of geothermal energy is for power 
    generation. Where high-enthalpy reservoirs exist, this is most 
    commonly achieved using various types of flash plant, in which the 
    pressure of hot, deep fluids is carefully manipulated to achieve 
    quantitative conversion of hot water to high-pressure steam, which 
    can then be used to spin conventional steam turbines [7]. The 
    earliest plant of this type was commissioned little over a century 
    ago at Larderello, Italy [2,7]. In cases where the temperature of 
    the geothermal fluid is too low for flashing to steam, electricity 
    can still be produced by means of “binary” power plants [4], in 
    which a secondary working fluid with a far lower boiling point than 
    water is heated via a heat-exchanger such that it is converted to a 
    high-pressure gaseous phase, which again can spin a turbine.
As the water exiting a flash or binary geothermal power plant is 
    typically still hot enough for myriad direct uses, geothermal 
    energy is especially suited to combined-heat-and-power (CHP) 
    applications [8]. If thus exploited, the overall efficiency of 
    geothermal power conversion is far higher than for most other forms 
    of energy. Furthermore, geothermal power plants are characterized 
    by extremely high capacity factors (typically in excess of 90%, 
    with many over 95%), which means that they are typically operated 
    24/7, producing copious amounts of baseload power and heat [6]. As 
    geothermal power plants typically have very low carbon emissions, 
    their ability to supply baseload puts them on a par with nuclear 
    energy for overall performance [4,9], with none of the operational 
    safety and hazardous waste management issues posed by nuclear.
The baseload power and heat production attributes of geothermal 
    distinguish it from most other renewables [4]: although biomass CHP 
    plants can perform similar service, they typically have far higher 
    operating expenditure (opex) requirements than geothermal plants, 
    due to the need to continually supply fuels of rather low 
    energy-density; furthermore, their capacity factors tend to be 
    rather lower than for geothermal, due to their greater maintenance 
    requirements and vulnerability to interruptions of fuel supply. 
    Solar, wind and wave notoriously suffer from intermittency, 
    reflected in low capacity factors (<30%); and although tidal 
    power is highly predictable, any one plant still tends to have a 
    capacity factor less than 60%. The capacity factors for hydropower 
    plants are seldom much greater. It is also important to note that 
    wind, wave, tidal and hydropower cannot directly produce heat, and 
    using the electricity they produce for conventional heating (i.e., 
    without heat-pumps) is a very wasteful use of high-grade energy. 
    While solar thermal energy is growing in importance, it is 
    generally restricted to producing hot water and rarely manages to 
    provide much space heating.
However, despite all these advantages, the uptake of geothermal 
    energy has to date been disappointing, with annual growth rates in 
    installed capacity since 2004 averaging around 5%, which compares 
    highly unfavourably with the equivalent rates for wind and solar PV 
    (25%–30%) [10]. While lack of appropriate technology for deep, 
    mid-enthalpy systems is partly to blame, and is exacerbated by a 
    persistent lack of public understanding of invisible, subsurface 
    phenomena [11], discussions with investors and engineers throughout 
    the geothermal sector invariably identify two common factors 
    inhibiting more rapid uptake of geothermal energy across all 
    enthalpy categories:
(i) uncertainties over resource availability in poorly-explored 
    reservoirs; and 
(ii) the cost profile, in which a large proportion of the 
    full-lifetime costs of systems are concentrated in early-stage 
    capital expenditure (capex).
Some of the solutions to these problems surely lie, at least in 
    part, in the domain of economic policy instruments, such as 
    dry-hole insurance schemes [12] and long-term loan arrangements. 
    However, there is still ample scope for technological innovation to 
    contribute to addressing the barriers to uptake [13], particularly 
    in non-volcanic regions where the majority of resources are low- to 
    mid-enthalpy (“petrothermal”) resources in deep strata of 
    unexceptional natural permeability [10]. 
 
This paper critically appraises some recently-reported 
    innovations and identifies gaps for future developments, taking a 
    broad view across the entire spectrum of geothermal technology: 
    from drilling and reservoir stimulation, through reservoir 
    modelling and management, to design and operation of mechanical 
    plant at surface that completes the energy conversion process. It 
    also ranges across the entire range of enthalpies found in the 
    subsurface [14], and concludes with a proposal for a whole-system 
    research agenda to expedite realization of the full global 
    potential of geothermal energy. 
2. Historical Context and Resource Categorization
The development of modern geothermal energy technology has had 
    at least two dimensions: from high-enthalpy to low-enthalpy 
    resources; and from direct use, through indirect use to CHP and 
    heat-pump applications [2,6,9,10,15]. The earliest impetus for 
    technological development was as an alternative to imported fossil 
    fuels in countries that lacked these in abundance. While the prime 
    motivations related to economics and securing energy supplies, the 
    air-quality benefits of switching from smog-producing coal and oil 
    combustion to the near-zero particulate emissions of geothermal was 
    soon recognized as an important auxiliary advantage [16]. By the 
    dawn of the 21st Century, the principal motivation for developing 
    geothermal had become its low-carbon and renewable credentials. In 
    the case of geothermal, these credentials are not as 
    straightforward to assure as for solar and wind. For instance, the 
    renewability of geothermal can be compromised by poor reservoir 
    management—especially any shortcomings in the reinjection of cooled 
    geothermal fluids—which can lead to quite marked overdraft of the 
    resource base, at least locally and temporarily (albeit the 
    time-scale may be decadal). Similarly, some geothermal systems can 
    have quite high CO2 emissions, especially in 
    volcanic regions where the magma conduits cut through carbonate 
    sedimentary rocks (as in much of Italy, for instance; [17]). 
    However, the majority of geothermal systems have very low carbon 
    emissions, with systems used only for heating purposes having some 
    of the lowest carbon emissions of any renewable technologies, at 
    around 4 g of CO2 equivalent per kWh 
    [9,18].
As previously noted, the very earliest human use of geothermal 
    resources was for recreational direct-use purposes [2] with 
    electricity generation commencing only in 1912 at Larderello 
    (Italy) [7]. These two historic uses exploit, respectively, low and 
    high enthalpy resources. Far more recent are the various attempts 
    to exploit very low enthalpy systems (which is solely for 
    direct-use purposes and requires the use of heat-pumps) and 
    mid-enthalpy systems (mainly for direct use, but also potentially 
    for power generation—and thus CHP—by means of binary cycle power 
    plants; [6,7,8,9,19]). Meanwhile, deep drilling in Iceland has 
    successfully intercepted a super-critical geothermal reservoir 
    [20], which had originally been discovered by accident. If 
    super-critical reservoirs can be successfully engineered—without 
    inducing pressure decreases within the reservoirs that would take 
    them below the critical point—the rewards will be high indeed: a 
    single super-critical geothermal well can be expected to produce an 
    order of magnitude more energy than a well of similar dimensions 
    accessing only sub-critical high-enthalpy resources [20].
Given these recent developments at both ends of the enthalpy 
    spectrum, the old bipartite categorization of geothermal resources 
    into low- and high-enthalpy systems [1,9] is no longer fit for 
    purpose [14]. A more refined categorization of resources, which 
    corresponds quite closely with the optimal domains for application 
    of different energy conversion technologies, was recently proposed 
    by Younger [14], and is further developed here in graphical form 
    (Figure 1).
 Figure 1. 
    Categorization of geothermal resources on the basis of enthalpy. 
    The shaded areas indicate parts of the parameter space that are 
    rare/impossible in natural systems. The numbers on the lines 
    dividing the different enthalpy categories are approximate values 
    of enthalpy in kJ/kg. 
3. Recent Innovations 
3.1. Spheres of Endeavour
It is both the fascination and the challenge of geothermal 
    energy that it is a multifaceted business, requiring critical 
    inputs from a wide range of engineering, natural science and social 
    science disciplines. As in all commercial spheres, not all 
    significant innovations are reported in the open literature, either 
    due to economic sensitivities, or simply due to a lack of a 
    pressure for industrial innovators to publish. This paper is also 
    focused on introducing and explaining the context for this 
    geothermal Special Issue of the journal Energies. Hence, the 
    account that follows will inevitably be partial. In broad terms, 
    however, it is clear that significant innovations in geothermal 
    energy have been made in the following areas: 
- Reservoir exploration and development; 
- Reservoir management and modelling; 
- Design, operation and maintenance of energy conversion 
    technologies; and 
- Socio-economic constraints on geothermal energy use.
Each of these areas is explored in the following sub-sections. 
    
3.2. Reservoir Exploration and Development
The concept of “reservoir” is seldom discussed in connection 
    with very low-enthalpy geothermal resources exploited using closed- 
    or open-loop heat-pump systems. There has been a tendency to 
    tacitly assume that individual heat-pump systems are unlikely to 
    interfere with each other, so that the overall heat (and water) 
    balance of the “reservoir” can be neglected. Where ground-coupled 
    heat-pump systems (GCHPS) are used for individual dwellings in 
    rural areas, this tacit assumption may be unproblematic. However, 
    for larger GCHPS, and wherever neighbouring systems occur in close 
    proximity to one another, failure to characterise and manage the 
    ground exploited by the system can lead to poor performance, 
    manifest in coefficients of performance (COPs) well below the usual 
    minimal target design value of 3 [15]. It can also result in mutual 
    interference between adjoining subsurface heat-exchangers, 
    diminishing the ability of a given volume of ground to support the 
    desired heating/cooling load [21]. A volume of ground used for such 
    purposes has been termed an “aestifer” [22], being a body of 
    geological material that stores and transmits heat. As such, an 
    aestifer is analogous to the more familiar “aquifer” that stores 
    and transmits water. Indeed, for large open-loop systems an 
    aestifer might be entirely identified with an aquifer. However, 
    because heat conduction is not limited solely to permeable rocks, 
    non-aquifer lithologies may fall within the boundaries of an 
    aestifer, particularly where the GCHPS exploiting it is a large 
    closed-loop system. In such cases, characterisation of an aestifer 
    involves delineation of spatial boundaries and determination of its 
    intrinsic thermal properties, especially thermal conductivity and 
    specific heat capacity [22].
Clearly drilling, in situ testing, sample 
    retrieval and laboratory testing all have crucial parts to play in 
    identifying fields of thermal properties within an aestifer, and 
    indeed of point-specific temperature as a key state variable. 
    However, as in all other arenas of geological exploration, such 
    direct measurement methods can never fully capture the totality of 
    the parameter fields. It is in this connection that geophysical 
    methods can play an important role, both in guiding the siting of 
    the limited number of boreholes that the project can afford, and in 
    interpolating petrophysical properties between boreholes. While 
    routinely used in applied investigations of geology at substantial 
    depths (e.g., for mineral prospecting, hydrocarbon exploration and 
    high-enthalpy geothermal exploration), the overall neglect of 
    aestifer characterization in very low-enthalpy GCHPS applications 
    is reflected in a scarcity of geophysical investigations of shallow 
    soils and rocks coupled to heat pumps. However, in a rigorous 
    review of experiences to date, Hermans et al. 
    [23] have found that a combination of electrical resistivity 
    tomography (ERT), the self-potential method (SP) and distributed 
    temperature sensing (DTS) can provide reliable sensing of 
    variations in subsurface temperatures and, by joint inversion with 
    other geoscientific information, powerful insights into spatial 
    variations in thermal conductivity and specific heat capacity. 
A particular category of aestifer with potentially widespread 
    use in many old industrial conurbations in Europe and North America 
    are flooded coalmines [24]. Large open-loop GCHPS exploiting these 
    are operating successfully in Springhill (Nova Scotia), Heerlen 
    (Netherlands) and Miéres (Spain) [14]. As the movement of both 
    ground water and heat in flooded mine workings is typically 
    complex, sometimes involving turbulent flow conditions atypical of 
    most natural aquifers, assessment of these aestifers is 
    particularly challenging. However, statutory compilation of mine 
    plans in most jurisdictions means that records of former mines are 
    generally quite good, at least for mines dating from the final 
    quarter of the 19th Century onwards. 
