
With regard to the psychophysiological self-report measures, 
    there were also no differences in the mean ratings of perceived 
    level of physical exertion between routines or motion sensing 
    technologies (Figure 4). However, both Move1 and Move2 were 
    reported by the subjects as being significantly more difficult than 
    all the other routines on the other two consoles (Figure 5). 
    Finally, comparison of the levels of perceived enjoyment of each of 
    the routines indicated that the Kinect1 routine was rated 
    significantly more enjoyable than Move1, Move2, and Wii2 routines 
    (Figure 6) and the Kinect2 routine was rated significantly more 
    enjoyable than the Move2 routine (Figure 6).
 Figure 4: Rating 
    of perceived exertion reported immediately after performing each of 
    the different dance routines using the various different body 
    motion sensing technologies. Data are shown as mean 
    (n = 11) and error bars indicate SEM.
 Figure 5: Rating 
    of perceived game difficulty reported immediately after performing 
    each of the different dance routines using the various different 
    body motion sensing technologies. Data are shown as mean 
    (n = 11) and error bars indicate SEM. *indicates 
    significantly more difficult versus the other sensing technologies 
    (P < 0.05).
 Figure 6: Rating 
    of perceived game enjoyment reported immediately after performing 
    each of the different dance routines using the various different 
    body motion sensing technologies. Data are shown as mean 
    (n = 11) and error bars indicate SEM. *indicates 
    significantly more enjoyable versus Move1, Move2 and Wii2 
    (P < 0.05). ‡indicates significantly more 
    enjoyable versus Move2 (P < 0.05).
The results were also analysed according to the randomised order 
    in which the subjects performed each of the routines and no 
    evidence of any order effects was found (data not shown).
In order to investigate whether there was any association 
    between perceived game difficulty and self-reported enjoyment 
    ratings for each routine and body motion sensing technologies, the 
    group means of each set of enjoyment rating scores were plotted 
    against the corresponding group means of the difficulty ratings. 
    The results of this analysis revealed a positive correlation 
    between increasing perceived game difficulty and declining game 
    enjoyment ratings (Figure 7).
 Figure 7: Group means 
    (n = 11) for rating of game enjoyment plotted 
    against rating of game difficulty for each separate dance routine 
    and body motion sensing technology. Error bars indicate SEM. The 
    data points were significantly correlated 
    (r2 = 0.84, 
    P < 0.05).
4. Discussion
The main findings of this study were that while the three 
    different consumer body motion sensors differ in the underlying 
    technologies, and therefore the type and number of body limbs they 
    are able to track the motion of, the separate dance-based exergames 
    developed for each video game console all required comparable 
    amounts of physical exertion (equivalent to moderate exercise) to 
    play them. However, while the perceived level of physical exertion 
    that the subjects reported after completing each of the routines 
    were comparable, the games were rated differently by the subjects 
    in their levels of difficulty and this appeared to influence the 
    level of enjoyment that they experienced.
Dance-based exergames normally comprise of a range of different 
    songs and associated routines. The routines selected for use in the 
    current study were selected on the basis that they all were at 
    similar tempos and all involved comparable amounts of arm and leg 
    movements. The results are somewhat surprising in that it was 
    expected that routines using the Microsoft Kinect peripheral would 
    elicit from the subjects more body movement during game play 
    compared to the other two peripherals. This was because of its full 
    body motion tracking capability compared to the more limited 
    tracking of only one arm by the other two peripherals. The absence 
    of an observed difference in the measured rates of oxygen 
    consumption between peripherals tends to suggest that the 
    technological differences between the three body motion sensing 
    peripherals do not matter in this regard. Furthermore, the measured 
    rates of oxygen consumption in this study are comparable to 
    previously published studies of dance-based exergames using 
    original foot-switch game controllers [13, 15, 21].
It has previously been suggested that interactive forms of 
    exercise may provide a degree of distraction from the sensations of 
    exertional discomfort [22], which would be a significant benefit, 
    particularly if the player is unaccustomed to exercising. It has 
    already been shown [20] that a variety of different exergames can 
    promote a flow state experience [23] that is in fact closer to 
    sport than exercise because of the challenge-based nature of video 
    game play. However, this issue has not been specifically 
    investigated in relation to dance-based exergames. It is therefore 
    of interest to consider whether the results of the present study 
    show any evidence of distraction from the sensations of physical 
    exertion. The numerical rating of perceived exertion scale has been 
    designed and validated so that the values (reduced by a factor of 
    10) correspond reasonably closely to heart rate [19]. Thus, if 
    dance-based exergames were also to provide a degree of distraction, 
    then the mean ratings of perceived exertion values shown in Figure 
    4 would be expected to be lower, given the magnitude of the mean 
    heart rates reported in Figure 2. Rather, the ratings of perceived 
    exertion values are a little higher than might be expected for 
    traditional forms of exercise at a comparable intensity. One 
    possible explanation is that the significant involvement of the 
    arms in the dance routines might have given the subjects the 
    impression that the exercise was of a higher overall intensity than 
    it actually was. Such a situation could arise since the arms have 
    proportionally smaller skeletal muscle mass compared to the legs 
    and therefore may be working at a higher metabolic rate. A further 
    possible explanation for this observation is that the dance-based 
    exergames require the player to focus specifically on rhythmically 
    coordinating the movements of their limbs and this increased need 
    for conscious proprioceptive awareness resulted in a greater 
    instead of a lesser-perceived level of exertion.
Game developers are well versed in the need to pay careful 
    attention to the balance of challenge versus player skill balance 
    in order to present them with a meaningful challenge [24]. However, 
    the results of the other self-report measures indicate that while 
    the difficulty and enjoyment ratings of each pair of dance routine 
    games on the same console were comparable, there were significant 
    differences in the ratings between the various consoles (Figures 5 
    and 6). Furthermore, the correlation analysis presented in Figure 7 
    suggests that the games that were perceived to be easier were also 
    the ones that the subjects reported as being more enjoyable and 
    conversely higher levels of perceived difficulty were associated 
    with reduced levels of enjoyment. There are several potential 
    reasons that may account at least in part for these observed 
    differences. The first is that there were significant differences 
    between the games (and therefore peripherals) in the level of motor 
    skill required to play them. The second is that the games differed 
    in their thresholds of acceptability for timing accuracy of a 
    player’s movements. The third potential reason is that the body 
    motion tracking peripherals differ in their underlying technologies 
    and affordances and as a consequence vary in the type and number of 
    limbs that they can track. The Kinect peripheral, by virtue of 
    being able to track all four limbs, is best placed to potentially 
    help guide and coordinate player movement. In contrast, the 
    movement of a single arm detected by the Wiimote peripheral is only 
    responsive to changes in relative rather than absolute position. As 
    a consequence, the tracked arm is unlikely to need to follow such 
    precise trajectories in space; moreover the player will also have 
    considerable freedom of movement in their nontracked limbs. 
    Finally, the Playstation Move peripheral by spatially tracking the 
    absolute position of the motion of the player’s arm requires 
    greater spatial precision of movement, but the absence of any 
    detection of lower limb movement means that it is less able to 
    guide and coordinate player movement. Unfortunately it is not 
    possible to make a clear distinction between these potential 
    explanations outlined above. However, it does seem unlikely that 
    any of the three games used in the current study would 
    intentionally be designed to be significantly more difficult at the 
    beginner level, given that they will have been subject to extensive 
    play-testing. Instead, it seems more likely that the subjects found 
    the games, that either more fully tracked and guided their 
    movements, or permitted significant movement freedom, to be more 
    enjoyable compared to the games that closely tracked a single limb 
    (arm) but at the same time gave less overall feedback. This 
    interplay between the degree of movement precision required and the 
    nature and extent of the feedback given to a player is an important 
    issue that needs to more fully investigated in order to help inform 
    the design of future exergames.
In terms of the potential to promote health benefits, it is 
    likely that most players who encounter dance-based exergames in 
    social or physical education settings will do so at beginner or 
    possibly intermediate skill levels and that considerable amounts of 
    practice will be required to progress beyond these levels. Thus, 
    from a health perspective, it would be highly desirable for 
    dance-based exergames to be designed such that, even at beginner to 
    intermediate skill levels, the games maximise the amount and 
    intensity of body movement while at the same time providing an 
    enjoyable and engaging game play experience. It is however 
    recognised that this would not necessarily be an easy outcome to 
    achieve. The most likely way in which this might be achieved would 
    be to steer game progression towards increasing step rates coupled 
    with less of an emphasis on increasing the complexity of moves 
    (i.e., faster repetitive movement instead of greater complexity). 
    It is probable that such an approach will also need some adjustment 
    (reduction) in the temporal accuracy requirements for movements to 
    be scored (at least at less advanced skill levels). Finally, the 
    initial skill demands should be set at a very low level to make a 
    game as widely accessible as possible and straightforward for 
    players to follow, and the game should be carefully structured in a 
    way that effectively facilitates player motor skill development and 
    progression. 
5. Conclusion
The results of this study suggest that while the three different 
    body motion sensor peripherals differ in their underlying 
    technologies and affordances, contrary to what was expected, they 
    do not appear to differ in the amount of physical exertion they 
    facilitate when used to incorporate body movement into dance-based 
    exergames. However, based on the self-reports measures from the 
    subjects, there appear to be differences in the game play 
    experiences that they offer. While the reasons for this remain 
    unclear and warrant further investigation, there is one particular 
    issue that has been highlighted and is of major importance. 
    Specifically, it is the relative influences on game play experience 
    of whole body motion tracking that is able to more holistically 
    guide and support player movement versus restricted limb motion 
    tracking that is agnostic to the movement of nontracked limbs and 
    therefore as a consequence offers players greater freedom of 
    movement. Finally, the potential commercial and health benefits of 
    widespread adoption and sustained use of dance-based exergames are 
    significant. There is, therefore, also a need to investigate the 
    factors that help to sustain long-term playing of dance-based 
    exergames and how these might be optimised, if these benefits are 
    to be realised.
