1. Introduction
Detecting gravitational waves has been one of the most 
    challenging experimental projects ever to be undertaken. 
    Gravitational waves are predicted from Einstein’s general theory of 
    relativity, and are associated with the acceleration of mass [1], 
    with the largest signals expected from violent astronomical events. 
    In September and December 2015, Advanced LIGO (aLIGO) [2] detected 
    gravitational waves associated with the merger of stellar mass 
    black holes [3,4], opening a new area of observational astronomy 
    and shedding new insight on the relativistic nature of our 
    Universe. General relativity describes gravitational waves as 
    fluctuating quadrupolar tidal strains in space, which thus produce 
    differential strains along perpendicular paths in space. This 
    differential strain can be measured by suspending mirrors (to 
    isolate from environmental effects) a distance apart, then using 
    laser interferometry to monitor their relative positions. In the 
    case of Advanced LIGO, the core optical configuration is that of a 
    simple Michelson interferometer, comprising a beamsplitter (BS) and 
    mirrors (Mx). Fabry-Perot cavities (FP) are incorporated within the 
    4 km arms, in addition to power recycling (PR) and signal recycling 
    (SR) mirrors at the input and output ports, respectively. A simple 
    schematic is shown in Figure 1. This paper will specifically 
    discuss the status and future requirements of the coating 
    technology required to make the highly reflective mirrors in these 
    instruments. Further details of how gravitational wave detectors 
    operate, the variety of astrophysical sources that might be 
    observed, and the main sources of fundamental noise expected within 
    these instruments, is detailed elsewhere, for example by Pitkin et 
    al. [5].
 Figure 1. (a) 
    Simplified schematic interferometric configuration used in Advanced 
    LIGO; (b) LIGO Livingston gravitational wave detector.
To achieve the sensitivities required to detect gravitational 
    waves, significant optical power is required inside the optical 
    cavities of the interferometers in order to reduced shot noise [6]. 
    This sets a formidable challenge on the required mirror 
    specifications, particularly in relation to the optical losses 
    associated with absorption and scatter. Optical losses will limit 
    the achievable optical gain within the cavities. Optical absorption 
    will also heat the mirrors, which can adversely affect 
    interferometer stability (e.g., thermal lensing). Furthermore, 
    optical scatter produces stray light that may reenter the 
    interferometer and create unwanted noise. In the case of Advanced 
    LIGO, the reflectivity required is >99.9%, with absorption 
    levels of <0.5 ppm, and scatter losses per mirror of <2 ppm 
    [7]. The only method by which this can be achieved over large areas 
    (diameter = 34 cm) is by using multilayer interference coatings 
    fabricated using ion-beam deposition (IBD) [8].
2. Thermal noise
Thermal noise associated with dielectric multilayer coatings 
    sets an important limit in precision measurement applications, such 
    as highly frequency-stabilized lasers [9,10,11], atomic clocks 
    [12,13], and gravitational wave detectors [14,15,16,17]. We discuss 
    here the connections between thermal noise and elastic dissipation 
    in mirrors, and between that dissipation and the structure of 
    amorphous films.
The first reported observation of thermally-driven displacement 
    was by Brown in 1828, of the irregular motion of pollen grains 
    suspended in water [18]. It was not until 1905 that a full 
    mathematical treatment of Brownian motion was presented by Einstein 
    [19]. It is now well understood that any parameter characterizing a 
    dissipative system will exhibit spontaneous thermal fluctuations, 
    as described by the fluctuation-dissipation theorem [20,21,22]. The 
    frequency-dependent behavior of these fluctuating motions, 
    Sx(f), (the power spectral density of the 
    fluctuations) is associated with the dissipative part of the 
    system’s impedance, Z(f), and can be shown to 
    be:

Where kB is 
    Boltzmann’s constant, T is the temperature, and 
    f is the frequency. The thermal fluctuations 
    (noise) are, therefore, related to the real part of the mechanical 
    impedance, which is the dissipative part and, therefore, 
    represented by the damping coefficient of the system. This can be 
    in the form of external damping, such as gas damping, recoil 
    damping, and/or electrostatic damping, however, external damping 
    effects are intentionally minimized in the design of gravitational 
    wave detectors. Internal damping (friction) arises from 
    anelasticity, where the strain response in a material is not 
    instantaneous when a stress is applied [23,24]. The phase lag 
    between the stress and the strain is known as the mechanical loss 
    angle, or the mechanical dissipation factor. In the following 
    section, the importance of the mechanical dissipation factor for 
    the thermal noise of high-reflection (HR) coatings will be 
    discussed.
3. Mechanical Dissipation in Thin Film Coatings
The mechanical dissipation factor can be defined as:

where Etotal is the 
    total energy stored in the oscillating system, 
    Elost per cycle
is the energy dissipated per cycle of the oscillation, 
    Δf is the width of the resonance peak (FWHM), 
    and Q is the mechanical quality factor.
Within the gravitational wave community, the mechanical 
    dissipation associated with optical coatings has been primarily 
    measured using mechanical ringdown experiments on cylindrical 
    samples, disks, or flexures/cantilevers. In this case, a resonant 
    mode of a sample is excited and then left to freely decay. If the 
    external sources of damping are minimized, then the mechanical 
    dissipation, φ(f0), can 
    be calculated from the time-dependent amplitude 
    decay,A(t):

where A0 is the 
    initial excitation amplitude and 
    f0 is the resonant 
    frequency. Further details of the experimental techniques can be 
    found in the literature [25,26].
The mechanical loss associated with mirror coatings is typically 
    calculated by measuring the mechanical loss of identical (or 
    nominally identical) substrates, one with a coating and the other 
    uncoated (control). The coating loss is then calculated from the 
    difference between the two samples, with a scaling factor that 
    provides the proportional energy stored in the coating for the 
    distortion associated with the resonant mode [27]. For some coating 
    and substrate combinations, it can also be important to remove the 
    coating thermoelastic loss, due to heat flow associated with the 
    different thermomechanical properties of the coating and substrate 
    [28,29]. The coating loss, 
    ϕ(f0)coating
can, therefore, be expressed as [30,31]:

where 
    ϕ(f0)coating 
    is the measured mechanical loss of the coated sample, and 
    ϕ(f0)substrate 
    is the loss of the uncoated substrate (control), and 
    ES and 
    EC are the elastic strain 
    energies stored in the substrate and coating, respectively.
4. Coating Thermal Noise Calculation
Work carried out by Levin [32], and later by Lui and Thorne 
    [33], quantified the importance of the location of the mechanical 
    losses within the interferometer mirrors in a gravitational wave 
    detector. The approach relies on a direct application of the 
    fluctuation-dissipation theorem to the interferometer readout (the 
    probing incident laser beam) on the front face of the mirror. In 
    this case, the thermal noise is calculated by applying a 
    hypothetical pressure on the front face of the mirror, with same 
    intensity distribution as the incident laser beam. The power 
    spectral density of the thermal displacement 
    Sx(f) then becomes:

where F0 is the 
    amplitude of the force, and 
    Wdiss is the power 
    dissipated due to the application of this force. (Noise equations 
    are typically presented in the form of power spectral density. The 
    amplitude spectral density of the thermal noise, measured in 
    m/√(Hz), is given by the square root of this quantity). The value 
    of this dissipation term can be calculated by integrating the force 
    across the volume of the mirror, taking into account the elastic 
    properties and mechanical dissipation at each location. In the 
    simple case of homogeneous mechanical loss, and where the incident 
    laser beam is considerably smaller than the mirror radius, the 
    Brownian thermal noise, 
    SITMx(f), 
    can be shown to be:

where ϕsubstrate is the mechanical 
    dissipation of the substrate material, Y and 
    σ are the Young’s modulus and Poisson’s ratio, 
    and ωm is the radius of the incident beam 
    (where electric field amplitude falls to 1/e of the maximum value). 
    Nakagawa et al. extended these calculations in order to approximate 
    the thermal noise in a coated mirror by assuming the coating to be 
    a thin surface layer of thickness and mechanical loss 
    ϕcoating [34]. Applying the Levin approach 
    eventually leads to the expression for the thermal noise of a 
    coated optic to be [35]:

where UB and 
    US are the strain 
    energies associated with bulk and shear displacements, and 
    ϕB and ϕS are the 
    mechanical losses of the coating associated with bulk and shear 
    motions. Assuming the mechanical losses associated with bulk and 
    shear motions are equal, 
    ϕB=ϕS=ϕC 
    (ϕC= coating mechanical loss), the thermal 
    noise of the coating can be written as:

This equation highlights a number of key aspects of coating 
    thermal noise. For example, the thermal noise amplitude will depend 
    on the square root of the loss-thickness product, in addition to 
    scaling inversely with the probing laser beam radius. Therefore, 
    strategies for reducing Brownian thermal noise in precision 
    experiments are typically targeted on some combination of (a) 
    reducing the mechanical dissipation associated with mirror 
    coatings, (b) minimizing the required coating thickness, and (c) 
    increasing the laser beam diameter. It should be noted that future 
    experiments also plan to cryogenically cool the suspended mirrors 
    to directly reduce thermal noise through the reduction of the total 
    thermal energy in the mirror [36,37]. However, the mechanical loss 
    of some materials is strongly temperature dependent and, thus, 
    cooling does not always result in a reduction in thermal noise. In 
    particular, the mirror substrates of current detectors are made 
    from fused silica. This material is not suitable for use at low 
    temperature as the mechanical loss increases by approximately five 
    orders of magnitude due to a broad peak centered around 40 K, 
    resulting in a significant increase in thermal noise from cooling 
    to these temperatures. A change in mirror substrate is, therefore, 
    required for cryogenic detectors, with crystalline silicon and 
    sapphire being the most studied candidate materials (discussion of 
    this is detailed in [36]). It should be noted that silicon is not 
    transparent at the current wavelength of 1064 nm and, thus, to 
    enable light to couple into the arm cavities of the 
    interferometers, a change in mirror substrate would also require a 
    change in the laser wavelength used in detectors, possibly to 1550 
    nm or 2000 nm. Suitable coatings for use at longer wavelengths and 
    at cryogenic temperature will be discussed in a later section.
5. Current Status of Mirror Coatings for Gravitational 
    Wave Detectors
The initial interferometric gravitational wave detectors used 
    multilayer mirror coatings consisting of ion beam-sputtered 
    amorphous silica (SiO2) and tantalum 
    pentoxide (Ta2O5), 
    which were demonstrated to achieve close to 1 ppm level total 
    optical losses (absorption plus scatter) [8]. A standard HR mirror 
    coating design was used, in which materials with high and low 
    refractive indices are deposited in alternative layers, each having 
    an optical thickness of λ/4, where λ is the wavelength of the laser 
    used in the detector (1064 nm for current room temperature 
    detectors). Figure 2 shows the design of the Advanced LIGO mirror 
    suspension stack, in addition to a cross-section image of a 
    standard HR coating stack. The mechanical loss of these coatings 
    was found to be dominated by the high index tantala layers, which 
    exhibit a mechanical loss of ~4 × 10−4 
    compared to a loss of ~5 × 10−5 for the 
    silica layers [25]. A reduction in the mechanical loss of these 
    coatings was later achieved through the incorporation of titania 
    within the tantala layers by the Laboratoire des Matériaux Avancés 
    (LMA) in Lyon. Titania was understood to pack densely within the 
    tantalum-oxygen structure, and its high melting point could help 
    stabilize the amorphous structure. Initial experiments demonstrated 
    that a 40% reduction in coating mechanical loss could be achieved 
    with a titania content of 22.5% (cation concentration) [38,39]. 
    Similar reductions were observed in films deposited by different 
    vendors, however, the initial baseline losses appear to vary 
    between vendors [40].
