1. Introduction
This article is about the colour sonar method in concept and 
    principle and a practical implementation based on a prototype 
    three-frequency sidescan sonar system. The utility of the method is 
    demonstrated using data acquired in the Pentland Firth off northern 
    Scotland.
The seabed backscatters incident sonar signal because: there are 
    acoustic impedance contrasts across the seabed interface; and the 
    seabed interface is rough in comparison to the wavelength of the 
    sonar carrier wave. The seabed interface comprises usually a seabed 
    surface where one is well defined and shallow sub-seabed surfaces 
    between contrasting materials. High absorption of ultrasound in 
    sub-seabed materials severely limits the skin depth of the 
    interface. The backscatter response of a seabed to the incident 
    sonar signal, being dependent on seabed interface roughness, is 
    therefore dependent on the wavelength of a sonar’s carrier wave: 
    i.e., the seabed is acoustically colourful. 
That the seabed is intrinsically acoustically colourful may be 
    recognised in developing a sonar technology and data at multiple 
    sonar frequencies acquired and mapped to optical primary colour 
    frequencies to generate optical colour images of the seabed for 
    human visualization. The principal advantage of colour imagery over 
    greyscale is that at each pixel, a colour datum occupies a position 
    in a three-dimensional (3D) RGB (red, green, blue) data space. If 
    colour data are reduced to greyscale, the data in three dimensions 
    are projected onto and will then occupy positions on a line (e.g., 
    the diagonal across the RGB data space). If data are colourful, 
    points distributed within the 3D RGB data space are more separate 
    from each other than they are along a line. Therefore, 
    multi-frequency colour images of the seabed enable greater 
    discrimination between different types of seabed than broadband or 
    single-frequency data represented as greyscale images. A secondary 
    advantage of colour sonar images of the seabed is that they can 
    (subject to the eye of the beholder) be very beautiful.
The idea of colour sonar is not new; colour sonar (and 
    concurrently radar) was patented in 1971 (Moore and Kans [1]). 
    However, the greyscale display of sonar data has persisted and not 
    been ubiquitously replaced by colour as it has in television (TV) 
    technology since the 1960s. Whilst the sonar amplitude backscatter 
    response of the seabed is a function of sonar system frequency, it 
    is also a function of several other things (e.g., Reed and Hussong 
    [2]; Searle et al. [3]; Augustin and Lurton [4]), which confound 
    the effect of frequency. These lead to a ploughed field effect on 
    mosaicked images in which distracting “plough swaths” are seen to 
    correspond to sonar swaths. Such artefacts are not uncommon on 
    mosaicked sonar images. They detract from the interpretability of 
    greyscale images, and the impact of colour is deleterious, further 
    detracting from, rather than facilitating, image interpretation. In 
    images affected in this way, artefacts are less distracting in a 
    greyscale image than a colour one, and this is quite likely a 
    primary reason for the persistence of greyscale display in sidescan 
    sonar imagery. 
For sidescan sonar image amplitude, and in a multi-frequency 
    system, colour, to be a meaningful property of the seabed, the 
    confounding effects need to be corrected. The principal confounding 
    effects are due to: absorption by water; geometrical spreading; the 
    shape of the sonar beam function (the combined transmit-receive 
    sonar beam intensity as a function of inclination angle in the 
    sonar’s frame of reference); sonar vehicle roll; the shape of the 
    seabed backscatter function (the proportion of signal incident on 
    the seabed backscattered to the sonar as a function of the incident 
    angle relative to the seabed); and seabed slope. The effects of 
    absorption and geometrical spreading may be corrected relatively 
    straightforwardly. The effects of sonar beam function and seabed 
    backscatter function are angular rather than time-varied effects 
    and more difficult to account for. It is only relatively recently 
    that adequate corrections have been devised (Hughes Clarke, 
    Danforth and Valentine [5]; Tamsett and Hogarth [6]). Further 
    details of these corrections are provided in the section covering 
    the processing of the experimental data presented in this 
    article.
After corrections have been applied, image amplitude and colour 
    constitute an effect of the seabed (normalised to the seabed 
    response at a reference inclination angle), and the additional 
    dimensions of information inherent in acoustic colour images of the 
    seabed compared to greyscale images are then directly analogous to 
    the additional information inherent in optical colour images 
    compared to greyscale images, e.g., in colour TV compared to black 
    and white TV images. 
For colour sonar, there is very little existing work. Some 
    colour images generated from multi-frequency multi-beam sonar data 
    are presented in Hughes Clarke and Muggah [7]. Colour has been used 
    to present multi-frequency infrasound data (<20 Hz) in deep 
    seismic sections (e.g., Partyka et al. [8]; Henderson et al. [9]; 
    McArdle et al. [10]). Uses for colour in medical ultrasound 
    applications have been explored (Holasek et al. [11]; Purnnell et 
    al. [12]; Holasek et al. [13]; Jones et al. [14]; Ide and Masuzawa 
    [15]), but are not in routine use. RADARSAT is an electromagnetic 
    (e-m) analogue of sidescan sonar, and wideband RADARSAT data are 
    displayed as a colour image in Mayer [16]. Additionally, for a long 
    time, satellite non-optical e-m data have routinely been mapped to 
    optical frequencies for human visualisation (e.g., Chuvieco and 
    Huete [17]). 
In this article, we describe: (i) a prototype multi-frequency 
    colour sidescan sonar system and its deployment in a survey of the 
    seafloor in the Inner Sound of the Pentland Firth, northern 
    Scotland; (ii) the sonar data processing methods applied to render 
    sonar data amplitude as a function of frequency, an unconfounded 
    effect of the seabed normalized to the response of the seabed at a 
    reference inclination angle; (iii) methods for rendering 
    three-frequency sonar data as colour images for human 
    visualisation; we discuss their pros and cons and recommend 
    preferred methods, which in our opinion have colour characteristics 
    that are harmonious with human visualisation facilitating image 
    interpretation; (iv) images of the seabed in the Pentland Firth 
    with particular emphasis on the colours generated for a variety of 
    seabed materials; we note the interesting phenomenon of colour 
    anisotropy (the dependence of the acoustic colour response of the 
    seabed on the direction of ensonification); (v) natural sonar 
    systems, and we compare them to anthropic ones and note that 
    Microchiropteran (echo-locating) bats’ sonar satisfies the 
    information criteria for acoustic colour, suggesting the hypothesis 
    that they perceive a colourful world view informed by sonar.
 2. Sonar System and Deployment in the Pentland 
    Firth
A prototype digital colour sidescan sonar system has been built 
    by Kongsberg GeoAcoustics (Underwater Mapping) Ltd. (Great 
    Yarmouth, UK). This transmits simultaneous port and starboard pings 
    at three frequencies: 114, 256 and 410 kilohertz (kHz). The sonar 
    is a basic range-only system. The ping for all frequencies is 16 
    cycles long corresponding to 128, 64 and 32 µs, respectively. The 
    fore-aft sonar beam widths are 1.0°, 0.75° and 0.5°, respectively. 
    The beams are directed at an inclination of 30° below the 
    horizontal in the sonar’s frame of reference, and the nominal beam 
    widths in the vertical plane perpendicular to the axis of the sonar 
    vehicle are approximately 60°. The sonar incorporates an attitude 
    sensor to measure pitch, roll and heading. 
A survey was conducted on 25 June 2015 in the Inner Sound of the 
    Pentland Firth, to the south of Stroma Island off the north coast 
    of Caithness, Scotland, over an area of approximately 900 by 1250 m 
    in an exploration of the seafloor in the tidally-energetic 
    environment (Figure 1).
 Figure 1. The 
    Inner Sound of the Pentland Firth is located between Stroma Island 
    and Gills Bay, northern Scotland. The experimental data in the 
    article were acquired in the area represented by the rectangle 
    immediately south of Stroma Island. This is shown enlarged to the 
    right with the extents of the swath in Figure 2, Figure 3, Figure 
    4, Figure 5 and Figure 6 and the swath montage in Figure 7 and 
    Figure 8. 
The sonar was deployed from a 7 m catamaran; the “ERI Aurora”. 
    The sonar was coupled to the vessel’s hull and suspended beneath it 
    via a pole mounted to the side of the boat. A Hemisphere V110 GPS 
    heading sensor was mounted directly above the sonar to measure 
    position and vessel/sonar heading. The ping rate was approximately 
    7.7 Hz. The sonar trace length was 120 ms, corresponding to a 
    maximum range and half-swath width of approximately 90 m from the 
    sonar. The survey was conducted along 15 lines spaced at 50 m 
    intervals running north-south approximately at right angles to the 
    general trend of isobaths. The vessel speed relative to the seabed 
    was approximately 4 knots (2 ms−1). 
The seabed was at depths varying from approximately 40 m below 
    the sonar vehicle across the south of the survey area shoaling to 
    approximately 10 m at the northern end of the survey area. The 
    bedrock is Devonian flagstone of Middle Red Sandstone age steeply 
    dipping at approximately 50° to the east. This is exposed at the 
    seabed over much of the survey area. It is overlain by a ridge of 
    gravel running across the southern half of the survey area and by a 
    sub-aqueous dune of sand underlain and surrounded by a field of 
    cobbles in the northern half.
3. Sonar Data Processing
Geometrical spreading was compensated for in two stages. First, 
    a time-varied gain (TVG) of +30 log(R) decibels (dB) (where R is 
    one-way travel range in meters) was applied during data 
    acquisition. This accounts for two-way intensity loss for point 
    targets (inversely proportional to the fourth power of range) and 
    for the effect of the area of the seabed ensonified by the sonar 
    pulse (proportional to range as a far-range approximation). 
    Secondly, the effect of the area of seabed ensonified by the sonar 
    pulse was corrected more accurately post-acquisition, accounting 
    for inclination angle, as well as range. 
Other processes were applied post-acquisition. Corrections for 
    absorption of +A.2R dB were applied, where A = 0.0335, 0.0600 and 
    0.1007 dB/m are the respective absorption coefficients for the 
    three frequencies estimated using van Moll, Ainslie and van Vossen 
    [18]. 
The locations of the first arrival of the seabed at normal 
    incidence on traces were determined. For a range-only sonar system, 
    this provides the sole estimate for the depth to the seabed from 
    the sonar, and a flat seabed across swath is assumed in subsequent 
    processing. 
The process of trace normalisation (TN) was applied. The angular 
    response of the sonar in the vertical plane orthogonal to the sonar 
    vehicle was normalised to the response at a reference angle in the 
    sonar’s frame of reference (30° below the horizontal). The angular 
    response of the seabed as a function of inclination angle estimated 
    with respect to the seabed’s frame of reference (the grazing angle) 
    was normalised to the seabed’s response at the reference 
    inclination angle. 
Beam functions and seabed backscatter functions are dependent on 
    sonar carrier wave frequency. Beam functions were estimated by 
    extraction from sonar trace and sonar vehicle roll data using the 
    method of Tamsett and Hogarth [6] (patent pending WO2014/170213) 
    from just over 600 contiguous traces affected by ±5° of roll from a 
    swath running over a rocky seabed approximately parallel to the dip 
    direction exhibiting an approximately uniform seabed across swath. 
    The method takes advantage of the rotation of the sonar’s frame of 
    reference with respect to the seabed’s frame of reference during 
    sonar vehicle roll. This enables multiple sonar beam sub-functions 
    to be extracted with angular extent equal to the amount of roll. 
    The multiple sub-functions are extracted in such a way that they 
    overlap with respect to angle at their ends and may subsequently be 
    reconciled in constructing single functions for the full range of 
    incident angles encountered in the data. In addition to normalising 
    data to the response at the reference inclination angle, a 
    correction was also applied for sonar vehicle roll. 
During processing of swaths, seabed backscatter functions were 
    extracted from the nearest 201 traces centred on the trace being 
    processed. Where swath bathymetry data are available, corrections 
    are also applied for slope, but this cannot be done for data 
    acquired using a range-only sonar system. 
The process of slant range correction was applied to display 
    data as a function of horizontal distance from the sonar vehicle. 
    
Finally, the process of rendering tri-frequency acoustic 
    amplitude for colour visualisation is applied. Humans perceive 
    colour optically, and therefore, the acoustic frequencies are 
    mapped to optical ones for human visualisation. This is a natural 
    extension of the presentation of single-frequency sidescan sonar 
    swaths as greyscale images with which we are familiar. It would 
    seem appropriate that seabed responses at the lowest sonar 
    frequency (114 kHz) should appear as the low-frequency optical 
    primary colour red in the electromagnetic spectrum and that the 
    mid-sonar frequency (256 kHz) appear as green, while the high sonar 
    frequency (410 kHz) as blue.
