1. Introduction
There context for addressing energy use in the built environment 
    includes: the climate change agenda; concerns about peak oil 
    supply; increasing fuel costs; costs of de-carbonising grid supply; 
    and security of supply for certain regions. All of these highlight 
    the value and need for renewable energy supplies. The context for 
    the increased development of renewable energy is clear. The balance 
    of evidence coming from the scientific community concerning the 
    threats and impacts of anthropogenic climate change is now widely 
    accepted (IPCC 2007). This had led to an economic analysis of the 
    actions needed to address these problems (Stern 2007), which 
    identify the benefits of early action. In addition to the climate 
    change agenda, other drivers in the form of concerns about peak oil 
    supply in turn leading to scarcity and increasing fuel costs, the 
    costs of decarbonising grid supply, and security of supply for 
    certain regions all highlight the value and need for renewable 
    energy supplies. To address these problems, a range of policies and 
    technologies are being developed to reduce consumption and to 
    provide a greater generating capacity of low carbon and renewable 
    energy. This requires action at a range of scales and across 
    industries, from national generators to individual consumers.
The built environment has particular responsibilities with 
    respect to its demand for energy and resources. The majority of the 
    population live in urban environments and buildings account for 
    about 50% the UK energy consumption, and housing produces 27% of 
    CO2 emissions (Boardman 2007). Furthermore, 
    the need for a national grid to serve the built environment, which 
    also results in transmission losses, is also a factor. Energy 
    consumption is based on both space and water heating, and 
    electrical use for lighting, appliances, etc. These demands can be 
    reduced by measures such as improved insulation and air tightness, 
    and this is typified through approaches such as 
    Passivhaus design, which aims to reduce fabric 
    and ventilation losses to a minimum. Further reductions can be made 
    through the use of efficient appliances and controls, but even with 
    these measures residual electrical loads remain.
Wind energy is one of the most mature renewable technologies. 
    The development of large scale wind farms both onshore and latterly 
    offshore, provides a significant proportion of the UK renewable 
    energy generation capacity. It is also one of the most visible, and 
    thus in some quarters, contentious generators. However, the use of 
    wind generation in urban environments has increased in scale in 
    recent years and provides significant potential. This chapter 
    discusses the policy drivers and approaches that are forming this 
    market at present.
2. Policy
Despite an inability of the global community to reach an accord 
    at the Copenhagen summit, many governments are committed to action 
    to address these problems. Both the UK and Scottish Governments 
    have identified targets to reduce both energy and carbon reduction 
    and these are supported through both legislation and incentives. 
    The targets identified with the UK Climate Change Act 2008 aim for 
    an 80% reduction in carbon emissions by 2050, with interim target 
    of 34% by 2020 (DECC 2009). The Scottish Government Climate Change 
    (Scotland) Act 2009 has the same 2050 target, with an interim 
    target of 42% by 2020 (Scottish Government 2009).
Many of these targets will be achieved through reductions in 
    demand and the decarbonisation of energy supply through both carbon 
    reducing energy generation technologies and large-scale renewable 
    generation such as wind farms, tidal and nuclear. Nevertheless, 
    there is considerable potential for energy production from 
    localised, distributed, small scale systems, (generally referred to 
    as micro generation), produced on or near buildings using a range 
    of technologies such as photovoltaics, combined heat and power, 
    micro-hydro and wind. An Energy Savings Trust micro generation 
    study (Energy Saving Trust 2005) estimated that micro generation 
    could produce up to 30-40% of electricity demand by 2050.
Small, distributed renewable generators are extremely well 
    placed to help achieve Government targets (A.S. Bahaj, L. Myers, 
    2007). Early reports such as the DTI Microgeneration strategy (DTI 
    2005) and the Scottish Executive Energy Efficiency and 
    Micro-Generation Bill proposal (Boyack 2005) highlighted the 
    potential benefits of this approach, which is now included in the 
    Climate Change legislation. The current UK coalition government 
    have recently opened consultation on a new Micro-generation 
    Strategy (DECC 2010), which aims to further develop this area.
The targets set in the Climate Change legislation and also 
    associated instruments such as the UK Low Carbon Transition Plan 
    and the UK Renewable Energy Strategy also impact on other 
    departments, so for example, planning authorities are also required 
    include policies in their development plans that require a 
    percentage of the energy in new developments to come from on-site 
    renewables (ODPM 2004)
In order to enable businesses and consumers to take steps to 
    meet these targets, a number of schemes for assistance, in the form 
    of advice and financial support have also been provided. These 
    include support for advisory organisations such as the Energy 
    Savings Trust, and the Carbon Trust and until 2010 these 
    organisations also administered major financial incentives in the 
    form of grants for energy saving and renewable measures, including 
    wind turbines. However on the 1st April 2010 Feed-in-Tarrifs were 
    introduced across the UK, which provides payments for the 
    generation of electricity from small-scale renewables including 
    Micro-Hydro turbines, Photovoltaics, Micro Combined Heat and Power, 
    and Small Wind Turbines (UK Government 2010). The principle of 
    FIT’s is that the owner is paid a tarrif per kWh of renewably 
    generated energy that offsets demand on the grid. This 
    significantly reduces the running costs and payback periods of 
    systems, making them financially attractive to householders and 
    building owners.
FITs cover use of Photovoltaics (PV), small scale combined heat 
    and power (CHP), small-scale hydroelectricity and small scale wind 
    (up to 15 kW). While all of these may be viable depending on the 
    site location and building form, there are some key differences.
