Introduction
There is a growing interest in the use of mobile technologies in 
    the educational sector, evidenced by both research and uptake in 
    the use of tablets and mobile phones in K-12 and Higher Education 
    (Groupe Spéciale Mobile Association (GSMA) 2012;Wu et 
    al. 2012). The recent New Media Consortium (NMC) Horizon 
    Report (Johnson et al. 2013) identified that the 
    adoption of tablet computing in higher education would occur within 
    a year or less, signifying that adoption is actually already 
    established in some areas.
Key opportunities in mobile learning include: encourage anytime, 
    anywhere learning; reach underserved children; improve 21st century 
    social interactions; fit with learning environments; and enable a 
    personalized learning experience (Shuler 2009, p. 6). In their 
    toolkit for adopting mobile learning, Joint Information Systems 
    Committee (JISC) (2011) provided some tangible benefits associated 
    with the use of mobile technologies. Most of these are examples on 
    Shuler’s list but also add the promotion of active learning, 
    enablement of new learning environments, and accessibility, to the 
    list of tangible benefits when using mobile technologies.
Recently, the University of Hull was commissioned by the 
    Scottish government to research the affordability and effectiveness 
    of iPads in education (Burden et al. 2012). The 
    study found that the use of tablet devices such as the iPad 
    facilitates the achievement of many of the core elements required 
    within the Curriculum for Excellence framework. It also noted that 
    the adoption of mobile technologies comes with many attendant 
    benefits for learning, which include motivation, engagement, 
    parental involvement, and understanding of complex ideas. 
    Furthermore, the study having tried several setups for implementing 
    the use of the iPad, found that the personal ownership of the 
    device is the single most important factor for successful use 
    (Burden et al. 2012, p. 9). Although this report 
    is encouraging, it flags up the issue of cost of implementation in 
    Further Education, with more students, and many more simultaneous 
    classes.
This pilot study aims to investigate the benefits as well as the 
    potential issues in implementing the use of mobile devices as 
    shared devices, and aims to answer the following questions:
(1) What are the benefits linked to the use of tablet devices in 
    the classroom?
(2) What are the potential issues linked to tablet use?
Literature review
The rate of adoption of mobile devices in Further Education 
    compared to K-12 has been at a slower pace and smaller in scale 
    (Wishart and Green 2010). A search of education index databases 
    using the search term ‘mobile learning’ in Further Education and 
    its counterparts produced only a handful of results in comparison 
    to a search of mobile learning in K-12 and higher education. Whilst 
    dissemination of mobile learning in Further Education has been 
    limited in peer-reviewed journals, m-learning in Further Education 
    has attracted attention via a proliferation of case studies and 
    good practice on the Internet.
Amongst the attributed benefits of mobile learning in Further 
    Education were the improvement of communication channels, updating 
    students about course materials via SMS (Derwen College 2008) and 
    other forms of alerts and updates through mobile devices. This 
    process has proven to be useful in engaging students and has 
    improved learner welfare and retention (Northampton College 2010; 
    Yorkshire Coast College 2010).
On a one tablet per class setup, there are cost benefits 
    associated with cheaper applications on tablets and cheaper 
    hardware (Bridgewater College 2013; Clydebank College 2012). Mobile 
    devices also facilitated location-based assessments (Excellence 
    Gateway 2008; South Lanarkshire College 2012) allowing assessors to 
    document student progress using various multimedia. This highlights 
    not just the digitisation of processes, but also the manner in 
    which mobile technologies can widen the physical scope of the 
    classroom environment.
Location-based learning using mobile devices facilitated 
    learners to have meaningful language interaction (JISC 2005b) and 
    explore concepts in authentic environments (Lius 2011; Mobiilisti 
    2012). In addition, the mobility of these devices allows learners 
    to engage with their learning materials anytime, anywhere and not 
    just in the classroom environment (JISC 2005a). Mobile devices have 
    now evolved from mere communication tools to pocket computers with 
    their own share of added functionalities and limitations. Patten, 
    Sanchez, and Tangney (2006) identified seven functions by which a 
    mobile device would serve educational requirements: administration, 
    referential, interactive, micro world, data collection, location 
    aware, and collaborative. The first four items are functions that 
    can be carried out with traditional fixed-location computers while 
    the latter three items highlight beneficial features of mobile 
    devices. Patten’s framework shows that a variety of learning 
    activities can be carried out with mobile devices.
Puentedura (2009) introduced the Substitution Augmentation 
    Modification Redefinition (SAMR) model for technology integration 
    (see Figure 1). The framework states that technology adoption 
    ranges from substitution, where the technology acts as a direct 
    substitute for traditional tools, to that of redefinition, where 
    the technology allows for the creation of new tasks previously 
    inconceivable. These two frameworks of mobile use and technology 
    integration will be used to evaluate the range of activities 
    carried out in the different subjects during the intervention, 
    alongside the evaluation of the benefits of using mobile 
    devices.
Methodology
This is an interventionist/action research project that examines 
    how the use of tablets as a shared device can contribute in a 
    Further Education learning environment. The authors’ role in the 
    research was interventionist, in that propositions were identified, 
    and then practitioners were consulted to invite their collaboration 
    to help to prove or disprove the propositions. Action research was 
    then undertaken in various classroom scenarios to observe, gather 
    data, and evaluate outcomes.
Project description
The pilot project was undertaken between November 2012 and May 
    2013, covering a period of 6 months. Prior to the start of the 
    pilot project, potential partners were identified. The subject 
    areas chosen were Hairdressing, the Language School and Social and 
    Vocational Studies (SVS) to spread the diversity of the pilot 
    study.

Figure 1. SAMR model of technology integration (Puentedura 
    2009).
The SVS department at Perth College works with students with 
    additional learning support needs, and these can be at the extreme 
    end of the support scale. They work to ensure that students can 
    attain and achieve, and progress through the system to obtain 
    higher level qualifications.
Contact with lecturers from the three subject areas was 
    established at the outset. The lecturers involved were briefed 
    about the nature of the pilot study and were also given 
    introductory training on how to use the tablets and potential 
    learning activities. The lecturers were also provided with 
    individual tablets for the duration of the pilot study to allow 
    them to explore the various apps available on the market.
Lecturers decided when and how they would implement the tablets 
    in their lesson planning, whilst trying not to disrupt the normal 
    course of activities for the semester. Support from the Learning 
    Technologies Centre was provided in terms of technical guidance on 
    the use of the tablets; pedagogical support by providing exemplars 
    of use; and in the case of one subject area, the development of a 
    bespoke application. Throughout the pilot study, this partnership 
    was maintained through immediate feedback on the part of the 
    lecturers and on-going support on the part of the Learning 
    Technologies Centre.
Joint Information Systems Committee Regional Support Centre 
    (JISC RSC) Scotland were involved in this pilot project, offering 
    support for the SVS project, which used the Infolio tool created by 
    JISC Techdis, (York, United Kingdom). This tool is still under 
    development, and the project offered feedback to JISC about 
    practical use of the tool, as well as suggestions for its 
    improvement.
Participants
The lecturers were nominated because of their track record in 
    using innovative technologies in the classroom and their previous 
    involvement with the Learning Technologies Centre. They also had 
    ideas for specific uses for the tablets, and were prepared to plan 
    and prepare for such use. These lecturers then selected the classes 
    to trial the tablets. A summary of participant numbers during the 
    pilot study is available in Table 1.
Equipment
Three operating systems were considered: Android, Apple and 
    Windows 8. Windows 8 was attractive from an organisational 
    viewpoint, because there was a potential for operating via the 
    College network for security and identification purposes. However, 
    at that time Win 8 tablets were not generally available and price 
    was an issue. Android was chosen on the basis of two factors: 
    price, and the relative ease of native app creation.
Table 1. Summary of participants per subject area.

A bank of 15 Samsung Galaxy Tab 2 10.1 tablets were purchased 
    together with a 20-slot charging unit. The devices run on the 
    Android 4.0 operating system, and have front and back facing 
    cameras. This purchase was financed by the college.
Students did not always have 1:1 access to devices. Students in 
    SVS had a 1:1 ratio during use, but hairdressing and Language 
    School students had to share devices. Three was the maximum number 
    of student groups.
Data collection and analysis
Data in the form of observation, video recordings, practitioner 
    interviews, and survey data were gathered throughout the pilot 
    study. The authors conducted all interviews with practitioners, and 
    recorded classroom activity for analysis. One camcorder on a tripod 
    and one portable flip-camera were used to record classroom 
    activities. Practitioner interviews were conducted throughout the 
    6-month period; two informal interviews, and one final formal 
    interview per curricular area. The informal interviews were related 
    to progress and immediate issues, and the formal interviews were 
    more evaluative in nature. Student surveys were conducted at the 
    end of the intervention.
Results and discussion
This section outlines the results of the pilot study in terms of 
    (1) the range of activities the tablets were able to support; (2) 
    student engagement; and (3) issues encountered.
A variety of learning activities were carried out using the 
    tablets as shown in Table 2. Most of these activities were carried 
    out as group activities with 2-3 members in a group. In the SVS 
    area, it was possible to provide a one-to-one student tablet 
    provision, with some activities carried out individually, and later 
    converged into a group activity.
The assortment of activities carried out varied greatly, ranging 
    from referential to collaborative activities. Table 3 shows how 
    each subject area utilized the tablets
Table 2. Activities carried out with the tablets.

Table 3. Activities mapped into Patten, Sa´nchez, and Tangney 
    (2006) functional pedagogical
framework.

following Patten, Sánchez, and Tangney (2006) functional 
    pedagogical framework. This shows that tablets can be suitable 
    alternatives for the standard fixed-location computers. At the same 
    time, the tablet’s data gathering features, as well as its form 
    factor, make it suitable for carrying out collaborative learning 
    activities inside or outside the classroom.
The activities carried out with the tablets in the various 
    subject areas are analysed in terms of the SAMR model. The tablet 
    feature(s) used, the nature of the activity, information on how an 
    activity is normally carried out without the tablets, and the 
    mapping of these tablet-based activities to the SAMR model is 
    available on Table 4.
From Table 4, it can be seen that some activities carried out 
    with the tablets offer only minor enhancements, such as the use of 
    the tablet for word processing, whereby the only measurable 
    benefit, as the practitioner states, is that it made reading the 
    student output a lot easier as opposed to a short story written on 
    paper. In one case, this minor enhancement provided a functional 
    improvement, namely, the case of using the Socrative App, which 
    allowed the lecturer to see how many students had made a mistake. 
    This allowed for instant corrective action or advice. The Socrative 
    App allows the lecturer to ask questions in the form of a multiple 
    choice question or a short answer without having to create the 
    questions in advance. This way, the question can be elsewhere (e.g. 
    from a textbook, or a totally new, impromptu concept), which is a 
    valued feature over some traditional classroom response systems.
Some tasks constituted a transformation of the learning activity 
    and from Table 4 we can see that these are activities that made use 
    of the tablet’s multiple features for the same task. This 
    highlights how the multiple features and functions of the tablets 
    make them suitable tools to be used in the classroom environment, 
    making previously unrealistic activities feasible.
Student engagement and feedback
The practitioners reported that students enjoyed using the 
    tablets regardless of which spectrum of the SAMR model this 
    technology integration fell into. In one instance of using the 
    LearnEnglish App, the practitioner reported that students spent as 
    much as 45 minutes exploring the app and trying out the different 
    exercises before eventually becoming disengaged and looking for 
    further direction. Whilst the novelty of the device may explain 
    this enthusiasm in engaging the students, it flags up that altering 
    the usual course methodologies can come with benefits, such as 
    improved engagement with the learning activity, and the ability to 
    carry out tasks they could not have done by traditional methods.
