“Silence Does Not Sound the Same for Everyone”: Student 
    Teachers’ Narratives Around Behavior Management in Scottish 
    Schools
Lorna Hamilton1
Introduction
Discipline or behavior management in schools is a common concern 
    for beginning teachers and is frequently cited as a significant 
    component in early career attrition (Goddard & Goddard, 2006; 
    Hammerness, 2011; Hong, 2010). Moreover, the impact of perceived 
    failure in relation to behavior in the classroom can substantially 
    affect the self-efficacy of teachers particularly at the beginning 
    of their careers (Hoy & Burke-Spero, 2005; Peters, 2009) and 
    the wide variety of discipline approaches adopted within different 
    schools can provide conflicting experiences and models. 
    Consequently, exploring and understanding more fully how we can 
    support student teachers in this area is important on a personal 
    and professional level for the student teacher and teacher 
    educators. Underpinning an urgency to consider this area, lies 
    concern for the young people who may find themselves the focus of 
    often punitive regimes (Bright, 2011; Reay, 2009). We know that 
    certain pupils (Gillies, 2011; Gray, Miller, & Noakes, 1994; 
    Reay & Wiliam, 1999) can be disproportionately affected by 
    school discipline approaches particularly with regard to exclusion 
    or expulsion from schools (Bright, 2011; Gillies, 2011; Osher, 
    Bear, Sprague, & Doyle, 2010).
This paper then is concerned with the details of two individual 
    case studies of student teachers during a 1-year Initial Teacher 
    Education (ITE) program—a Postgraduate Diploma in Education 
    (PGDE).1 The concern, here, was with 
    exploring the ways in which the beliefs and values of student 
    teachers might affect their engagement with different approaches to 
    behavior and how they could be encouraged to reflect critically on 
    the philosophies underpinning them. This critical engagement was 
    supported through a new elective course that set out to encourage a 
    bridging between theoretical and practical components of early 
    professional development (EPD). Establishing a stronger link to the 
    cognitive aspects of EPD while also helping student teachers to 
    engage meaningfully and critically with the social and relational 
    influences in schools, underpinned the elective course.
Some Key Issues in the Literature
ITE and Developing Approaches to Behavior
In today’s classrooms, increasing narratives of derision in the 
    media and in policy rhetoric, within the UK and beyond, around poor 
    pupil behavior (Gillies, 2011; O’Neill & Stephenson, 2012) have 
    led to calls for changes in the ways in which teachers deal with 
    discipline issues. Yet, until recently, we had limited knowledge 
    about the problems that teachers face at the beginning of their 
    career in relation to behavior and whether support within ITE 
    merely focused on immediate survival through application of rules 
    and sanctions or on specific behavior approaches. ITE providers may 
    focus on promoting traditional behaviorist outlooks (Atici, 2007; 
    Ben-Peretz, Eilam, & Landler-Pardo, 2011; Hammerness, 2011; 
    O’Neill & Stephenson, 2012), but in some cases, this may mean 
    little happens at the program level as student teachers may be 
    thought to gain behavior management skills while in placement 
    schools through experienced teacher modeling and practice in 
    classrooms (Hammerness, 2011). In other contexts, a more humanist 
    approach to behavior may form a small element within a larger 
    Teacher Education program, but this may be in contrast to the 
    tendency toward behaviorist models used in schools (Hamilton, in 
    press; Riddell, 2006).
Emerging concern around student teacher development and behavior 
    in classrooms has increased in the past 5 years across a wide range 
    of national contexts (Atici 2007; Barker, Yeung, Dobia, & 
    Mooney, 2009; Ben-Peretz et al., 2011; Hammond-Stoughton, 2007; 
    Kyriacou & Martin, 2010; McNally, I’anson, Whewell, & 
    Wilson, 2005; Wubbels, 2011). Schleicher (2011) reporting on the 
    Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development’s (OECD) 
    research into teaching and learning across 23 countries found that 
    concerns around behavior were evident in most head teacher 
    responses and was a concern while teachers themselves were seeking 
    help in approaching behavior management. This underpins the 
    significance of behavior as a key issue at an international level 
    in schools and within ITE.
Approaches taken to this aspect of teaching practice may vary 
    greatly across institutions and even within countries: Ben-Peretz 
    et al. (2011) found that in Israel, a traditional approach 
    dominated ITE, while Stough (2006) found that only about 30% of 
    such programs in the United States provided courses on behavior at 
    all within ITE. There is no real consensus on how best to prepare 
    student teachers for behavioral issues in schools, and a strong 
    suggestion is that either the responsibility for this aspect of EPD 
    is placed within school placement experience and modeling taking 
    place there or specific behaviorist and/or humanist perspectives 
    are taken in ITE. The latter provision is often regarded by 
    students as too abstract and not sufficiently practical or applied 
    (Ben-Peretz et al., 2011; Stough, 2006). Yet the negative role that 
    behavior and misbehavior play in poor teacher self-efficacy and 
    lack of persistence within the profession (Friedman, 2006; Hong, 
    2010; Peters, 2009) highlights the impact that lack of preparedness 
    can have on new teachers. In addition, Van Tartwijk and Hammerness 
    (2011) highlight the significance of classroom management 
    competence as well as clarity of expectations and quality of 
    feedback as ways in which teachers can have a marked impact upon 
    pupil outcomes, and consequently, they argue, that classroom 
    management should play a much more substantial role within teacher 
    education. Questions then are raised over the shape that any 
    learning around behavior management should take within ITE and how 
    this might articulate with school placement experiences.
Complex national and local policy and institutional (school) 
    approaches to behavior may chime or challenge student teachers. 
    Situated within schools, preservice learning occurs within such 
    policy umbrellas and via conversations and dialogues with 
    experienced colleagues (Avalos, 2011). It is also helpful to 
    acknowledge the significance of schools and teacher approaches to 
    behavior and relationships in the classroom for pupil engagement or 
    deviance from any norms in place. The power imbalance inherent in 
    this schooling context between teacher and pupil (student), as well 
    as student teacher and experienced teacher, underlines the need to 
    engage critically with the ways in which teachers approach behavior 
    and relationships in the classroom and the role that teacher 
    education may play in supporting early teacher development 
    (Kyriacou & Martin, 2010).
ITE input and school experience are often seen as complementary 
    elements helping to shape student teacher practice and 
    understanding, two connected but separate entities. Yet, the 
    possible conflicts within and across these spaces in relation to 
    behavior and building relationships with young people have seen 
    relatively little research (Atici, 2007). Consequently, there is 
    insufficient evidence with regard to the ways in which ITE 
    institutions can best provide support so that student teachers can 
    establish a strong foundation for future development in working 
    with young people across these two spaces while dealing with the 
    possible conflict that may arise in terms of teaching practice, 
    beliefs, and values.
Within ITE, the perennial theory–practice divide challenges 
    teacher educators to find ways to engage with student teachers 
    meaningfully to enhance learning and the synthesis of theoretical 
    frameworks and practice. Some would argue that to begin to do so, 
    there is a need to conceptualize the journey of student teachers 
    (preservice teachers) as narratives (Hamilton & Pinnegar, 
    2000), reflecting, at times, conflicting metaphors of teachers and 
    teaching (Bullough & Baughman, 1997; Clandinin & Connelly, 
    1995). In the next section, consideration is given to the role of 
    narrative in conceptualizing and understanding student teacher 
    EPD.
Narratives of Student Teachers
The narratives of student teachers and their visions of what 
    being a teacher means play an important role in the teaching and 
    learning experiences of those in schools (Schultz & Ravitch, 
    2013). Narrative identity theory provides a helpful conceptual 
    frame here to view identity formation and reformation as well as 
    the complexity of individual “webs of interlocution” 
    (Taylor, 1992).
These webs comprise the myriad narratives of the individual and 
    at any one time one or more strands may hold particular prominence 
    for the student teacher, highlighting some and sidelining others. 
    This represents a complex interaction between different aspects of 
    the self and the falseness of attempts to separate the personal and 
    the professional.
In using narrative identity here, the emphasis is placed on the 
    embeddedness of the individual within relationships and 
    experiences, within a multilayered and highly fluid telling and 
    retelling of who we are. There are narratives of mother, of 
    teacher, of belonging to community and nation and to metanarratives 
    of, for example, social justice and inclusion. The personal and 
    professional are not then able to be dislocated from the web of 
    narratives and myriad interlocutions taking place. Yet, by engaging 
    with the narratives that student teachers tell as they attempt to 
    make sense of teacher education experiences in relation to past and 
    future selves and within policy and metanarrative contexts, we may 
    be able to more clearly understand how a sense of teacher self may 
    evolve and be supported (Hamilton, 2011). Within this continual 
    process of becoming, some narratives may hold greater sway than 
    others at any given time and, as Taylor (1992) argues, 
    “there may be changes to the web but there is still a 
    dependence on the web of interlocution” (p. 39).
In a previous study (Hamilton, in press), the author highlighted 
    the narrowing of focus, by some student teachers, on narratives of 
    survival and compliance in response to social and relational 
    influences of teaching practice. The difficulties faced by the 
    students in trying to deal with behavior in classrooms often 
    created a degree of dissonance between school values and beliefs 
    and those of the student teacher. The dominance of the powerful 
    narrative of experienced teachers in positions of power meant that 
    survival and compliance involved echoing the existing approaches, 
    as modeled by teachers in schools. Given the multiplicity of 
    models, student teachers were likely to superficially reflect 
    contradictory approaches to behavior but were not necessarily able 
    to engage with beliefs and values or broader ideas and texts on 
    behavior, weakening the possible influences on the narrative 
    web.
We know that student teacher stories of being and becoming a 
    teacher and the beliefs and values that inform their attitudes 
    within these stories are crucial in forming and reforming 
    professional identity (Bullough & Baughman, 1997; Johnson, 
    1988; Schultz & Ravitch, 2013). Such beliefs, often based on 
    student teachers’ own lived experiences as learners, have a 
    tendency to persist even in the face of conflict with ITE program 
    teaching and, despite any conflict arising between internal beliefs 
    and external input (Sternberg, 1999). McNally et al. (2005) 
    highlight the tendency for student teachers to build their budding 
    professional identity on social and relational connections to their 
    past, present, and future selves and to their practicum colleagues. 
    However, it is important to note that the latter colleagues are 
    perhaps more likely to have an impact than teacher educators on 
    shifting stances in relation to beliefs and values—at least on a 
    temporary basis (McNally et al., 2005). Cognition is less likely to 
    be enhanced to the same extent and so finding ways to encourage a 
    greater balance between the emotional and relational aspects of 
    teacher education experience and a more active engagement with 
    cognitive elements would appear to be helpful if we are to 
    encourage critical and reflective practice in relation to 
    behavior.
Research suggests that we should not ignore or minimize the 
    significance of teacher beliefs and values (Bullough & 
    Baughman, 1997; Korthagen, 2004; Nias, 1989), their engagement with 
    or disengagement from ITE provision and school experiences. For 
    student teachers to more fruitfully engage critically with their 
    current beliefs and values while attempting to evaluate possible 
    alternative or extended models of thinking around behavior, it is 
    argued here, that ITE should not favor particular approaches to 
    behavior but instead should engage with conflicting stances and 
    models, via role-play, discussion, and debate, encouraging internal 
    cognitive dissonance within the student teacher to be acknowledged 
    and articulated (Hamilton, 2006). By this I mean, encouraging 
    engagement with conflicting beliefs, attitudes, and values to bring 
    about cognitive dissonance (Festinger, 1957; Hamilton, 2011) in the 
    individual. This approach is somewhat at odds with other 
    researchers who argue that the personal and professional are 
    separate (Korthagen, 2004) and any friction between the two should 
    be avoided.
The prevailing student teacher approach to behavior during a 
    previous project (Hamilton, in press) had highlighted a student 
    teacher emphasis on looking to models for behavior within schools 
    coupled with a trial and error approach to behavior underpinned by 
    a vital survival instinct—an acknowledged aspect of early 
    professional learning (Feiman-Nemser, 1983). This led to a struggle 
    between compliance with the dominant school models or resistance 
    and adherence to personal beliefs and values. As a result, in this 
    project, emphasis has been placed on the importance of 
    strengthening links between theory and practice through, generating 
    dissonance to make implicit beliefs explicit, engaging student 
    teachers in a critical selection and review of significant moments 
    from teaching practice. Within this process, the ITE program does 
    not want to sell a particular discipline agenda but instead, 
    student teachers are encouraged to “try on” 
    different approaches bearing in mind the constraints and 
    opportunities in individual schools. One size does not fit all, and 
    students may build hybrid models of engagement with young people. 
    Through commentary on their work, presentations, and challenge in 
    conjunction with the previous work outlined, student teachers are 
    supported in clarifying their choices, making sense of outcomes, 
    and throwing light on the relationships between their own beliefs 
    and values and their emerging professional choices in relation to 
    practice.
