Discussion
This study set out to explore the relationship between work 
    stress, strain, and secondary teaching role within the Scottish 
    context. Positive significant relationships were observed between 
    work stress and strain and this was especially marked in relation 
    to teacher perception of subjective work stress (SITS) and the 
    clinical measure of strain (GSC). However, as a group, these 
    secondary teachers did not record stress and strain scores that 
    would raise concern for their health and well-being. This is 
    somewhat interesting, as the study took place in the most 
    challenging times of the school year for teachers in terms of final 
    preparation of pupils for national exams. However, experiences of 
    work stress and strain did differ significantly according to which 
    role these teachers held within this Scottish context, with middle 
    managers, in particular, reporting similar issues as experienced by 
    a clinical population (Mahmood, 1999). In addition, 22% of this 
    group reported changes in well-being normally associated with 
    psychiatric morbidity in a general population (Cox et al., 1987). 
    To fully understand why middle managers specifically reported 
    feelings of “personal ineffectiveness” and “depression” similar to 
    that of a clinical population, the precise nature of their 
    experiences of “work” is compared with that of their colleagues and 
    placed within current discourses of “work stress.”
Previously within the Scottish context “workload,” “pupil 
    indiscipline,” and “relationships” were identified as the main work 
    stressors for teachers (Dunlop & Macdonald, 2004). In the study 
    reported here, “indiscipline” continues to present secondary 
    teachers with challenges and was identified as the groups’ main 
    stressor on a daily basis. In relation to “job demands” (Cousins et 
    al., 2004), the main work stressors for the group were associated 
    with workload (e.g., “too little time”) and the teaching-learning 
    interface (e.g., “indiscipline”). Workload was identified as making 
    the greatest contribution to levels of strain. Interestingly, 
    senior managers with whole-school management and no teaching 
    responsibility found work significantly less stressful than any 
    other group, reporting “indiscipline” and “workload” only as 
    stressful on a daily basis. In stark contrast, middle managers, who 
    had responsibility for managing their departments and teaching, 
    reported 14 different stressors relating to workload and the 
    teaching-learning interface as stressful on a daily basis. For this 
    group, the main stressor rather than indiscipline was “changing 
    demands.” In addition, middle managers were the only group to cite 
    three further change-related stressors as stressful on a daily 
    basis. Within this study, it would be true to say that all teachers 
    no matter what role, have experienced the plethora of changes that 
    have relentlessly swept across Scottish education (Pickard, 2003). 
    According to their role, they will have greater or lesser control 
    over these changes. It is suggested here, that the demands of 
    change may be a potential stressor (Fletcher, 1992), but it is 
    recognized that coping with change can also serve as a motivational 
    force (Demerouti, Bakker, Nachreiner, & Schaufeli, 2001) for 
    the teacher. However, within this study “change” appears to be a 
    significant stressor in reality for the middle manager only. This 
    may be because they are charged with implementing and leading 
    change while balancing work demands, such as those associated with 
    “workload” and the “teaching-learning interface.” Moreover, within 
    this study it appears that the range of stressors reported by 
    middle managers clearly indicate a level of both quantitative 
    (e.g., “too much paperwork,” “not enough time for development 
    work”) and qualitative (e.g., “changing demands,” “inclusive 
    education”) overload. The etiology and number of stressors cited by 
    middle managers as stressful on a daily basis suggest not only 
    “overload” but also a level of role ambiguity (Caplan et al., 1975) 
    and role conflict (Kahn, Wolffe, Quinn, Snoek, & Rosenthal, 
    1964). At one level, the middle manager is striving to ensure an 
    inclusive education as advocated within the national priorities in 
    Scotland (Humes, 2003), while managing administrative duties 
    associated with leading their department. In addition, if we feed 
    the obvious demands of “change” into the everyday reality of being 
    a middle manager, evidence of role conflict emerges. It is quite 
    conceivable that balancing management and teaching within a climate 
    of change could be stress inducing. However, in the case of senior 
    managers within this Scottish context, it is argued that work 
    stress did not culminate in levels of strain that would in the long 
    term negatively affect personal well-being. This may be attributed 
    to the level of control they have within their own institutions, 
    and moreover, within this study no senior manager was balancing a 
    management and teaching commitment. This is further corroborated by 
    the fact that middle managers report workload as significantly more 
    stressful than senior managers. In addition, the interaction 
    between “workload” and the “teaching-learning interface” is further 
    exemplified by the fact that each made a significant contribution 
    to levels of strain reported.
It is recognized that, change in any work context can be stress 
    inducing as individuals adapt to changing demands, such as those 
    cited by the middle managers within this study (Brown, Ralph, & 
    Brember, 2000; Troman & Woods, 2000). For some the stress can 
    serve as a positive motivational force (Mousavi, 2007; Nydegger, 
    2002) while for others, levels of resilience and indeed well-being 
    can be compromised (Kyriacou, 2001). It is argued that within this 
    study, change in itself cannot be held accountable for the fact 
    that middle managers have reported significantly greater levels of 
    strain than any other group and report multiple daily stressors 
    within their specific work context. Research has highlighted a link 
    between the “pile-up” of stressors and psychological health (e.g., 
    Payton, 2009; Thoits, 2010; van Dick & Wagner, 2001), and it is 
    acknowledged that unresolved stress can negatively affect 
    well-being (Fletcher, 1992). Within our study, both classroom 
    teachers and middle managers reported 8 to 14 aspects of work as 
    stressful on a daily basis. While there were similarities in 
    reported “stressors,” it is clear that middle managers alone were 
    feeling the strain of “change.” Interestingly, when Dunlop and 
    MacDonald (2004) surveyed teachers across the range of schools 
    within the Scottish context, only 5% of the participants reported 
    constant changes and new procedures as stressful (Bricheno et al., 
    2009). Five years on, it would appear that for those teachers 
    charged with the dual role of managing colleagues and teaching, 
    “change” has brought with it challenges. It is worth noting that a 
    significantly greater proportion of middle managers were aged 40 or 
    more and had amassed 16+ years of teaching experience. These 
    findings may be better understood when we consider middle 
    managers teaching load 
    (70%-80%) and management role within the context of the “passage of 
    time” (i.e., years of teaching experience) and “change.” It has 
    been acknowledged that secondary schools in Scotland have 
    experienced unprecedented change since 1999 (Pickard, 2003). Eighty 
    percent of our middle managers were in post before 1997, meaning 
    that they have, first, been at the heart of these relentless 
    changes, and second, have had to repeatedly strive to match their 
    personal and professional resources, to constantly changing job 
    demands. It is suggested that levels of strain reported by middle 
    managers, in particular, may support the assertion of Baumeister et 
    al. (1999) that the efficacy of “coping strategies” are context 
    dependent. If that context and indeed, landscape is constantly 
    shifting, it is conceivable that mismatch between resources and 
    demands could lead to strain.
Against this backdrop, it could be argued that the significant 
    levels of strain experienced by middle managers in particular, may 
    in the long term negatively affect not only their well-being but 
    also productivity (van Dick & Wagner, 2001), self-efficacy 
    (Kyriacou, 2001), and indeed, their mental health (Tennent, 2001). 
    Dealing with this amount of quantitative and qualitative overload 
    on a daily basis would leave little space for the middle manager to 
    recover from their daily efforts to manage demands (Sitaloppi et 
    al., 2009) and indeed continue to harness their personal and 
    professional resources. It would, however, be wrong to assume that 
    the relationship between stress and strain highlighted here, could 
    not also be associated with factors outside of work or indeed, 
    individual’s efforts to achieve a work–life balance.
Conclusion and Contribution
Findings from this study have further illuminated secondary 
    school teachers’ experiences of work stress within the Scottish 
    context. In addition, the extent to which “teaching role” and 
    specific “features of work” can contribute to levels of strain and 
    indeed potential health impairment, has been demonstrated. More 
    importantly, this study has placed teachers’ perceptions of stress 
    and strain within not only a general but also a clinical context. 
    Crucially, the interaction between demands, such as workload, 
    change, teaching-learning interface, and professional ethos further 
    supports evidence to suggest the dual pathways emanating from the 
    apparently role-specific interaction between job demands and 
    resources. Surprisingly, within this study middle managers 
    experienced levels of strain which would normally be seen in a 
    “clinical” population. The key risk factors for those teachers who 
    reported significantly higher levels of strain were not simply 
    workload, but more significantly, issues relating to organizational 
    change. It could be argued that the levels of “personal 
    ineffectiveness” and “depression” experienced by middle managers 
    suggest an imbalance between resources and demands and provides 
    compelling evidence of the physical and psychological costs of a 
    “pile-up” of stressors (Thoits, 2010) indicative of both 
    quantitative and qualitative overload. Over time, such a scenario 
    could culminate in middle managers in particular, experiencing 
    impaired health, a decrease in professional fulfillment, and 
    ultimately disengaging from work. In times of significant change of 
    an unprecedented nature within this Scottish context the 
    consequences of such a scenario are wide reaching, not only in 
    relation to the well-being of the individual “middle manager,” but 
    also for the colleagues they nurture in the hope that they will 
    become the leaders and middle managers of tomorrow. What is more 
    concerning is that for some middle managers early retirement on 
    health grounds could become a real possibility. And with that, we 
    potentially lose a wealth of experience, which in a “healthy 
    working environment,” in which risk factors are monitored and 
    minimized, could serve to drive “change,” rather than be engulfed 
    by it. In addition, the extent to which middle managers, who report 
    multiple stressors on a daily basis, feelings of personal 
    ineffectiveness, and symptoms of depression, can continue to engage 
    and inspire their pupils in a professional climate where support 
    seems but a distant memory, may be questionable.
Limitations
Within this study it was important to address the uniqueness of 
    secondary school teachers’ experiences of work stress within this 
    Scottish context by using the home grown SITS. However, this 
    prevented a direct comparison with other studies that have used the 
    Management Standards (HSE, 2004) indicator (e.g., Kerr, McHugh, 
    & McCrory, 2009). Nonetheless, it was possible to identify 
    ‘risk factors’ within the Scottish context and consider the extent 
    to which these are commensurate with current discourses of work 
    stress. However, these findings merely 
    indicate a relationship and should not be construed as indicative 
    of a causal work stress-strain link. Moreover, the limitations of 
    correlation research are well documented and the researcher 
    inferring “causality” must do so on the basis of underlying theory 
    (Rudestam & Newton, 2001, p. 31)
Future Study
As teachers within the Scottish context continue to meet the 
    challenge of adapting to significant changes at the chalk face, 
    especially, pertaining to curriculum, teaching, learning, and 
    assessment, it would be imperative to consider the complexity of 
    the climate in which they are immersed. This may involve revisiting 
    the study conducted by Dunlop and MacDonald (2004), with a view to 
    comparing teachers (across all sectors) experiences of work stress 
    and well-being in light of the significant changes that have taken 
    place from 2004 onward. However, it would be important to develop 
    the study design to incorporate a qualitative element that enabled 
    teachers to provide a phenomenological account of their reality at 
    this moment in time. Such a study becomes even 
    moretimely when we consider 
    the new revised standards for teachers’ continued professional 
    development recently launched by the General Teaching Council for 
    Scotland (2013). When we place these new “standards” within a 
    climate of change and alongside the findings of this study, it 
    becomes even more crucial that research within the Scottish context 
    considers how best to foster healthy working environments in which 
    all can flourish. This may require research that fully explores 
    teachers perceptions of 
    not simply the demands of work but their perceptions of the 
    “professional ethos” in which they are situated.
Moreover, we need to be confident that 
    teachers, working climate 
    is one which considers the unique role-specific as well as generic 
    demands of work teachers grapple with within the Scottish context, 
    on a daily basis. Building on the findings reported here, it may be 
    time to revisit the notion of work stress and strain across 
    Scottish schools with a clearer focus on recent developments in our 
    understanding of work stress. Against the backdrop of current 
    discourses of equity, inclusion, risk factors, and indeed “health 
    and well-being” (Horrell et al., 2012), it may be timely to 
    consider how teachers 
    experience of work may shape their perception of job demands within 
    the Scottish context. Moreover, the extent to which the ebb and 
    flow of their interactions with “work” enables them to minimize the 
    “risk factors” highlighted within this study, and in addition, 
    harness job-personal resources to good effect is certainly worthy 
    of further consideration.
