Introduction
Drawing ability begins at a young age and develops through 
    adulthood. Toddlers enjoy scribbling with different colors while 
    children begin to draw more realistic drawings around age 4. This 
    process continues to evolve into and beyond adolescence(Lowenfeld 
    & Brittain, 1987). Age is an important factor in drawing as 
    holding a pencil and drawing precisely requires the finger muscles 
    and general motor control to be sufficiently developed. This is 
    said to happen around the age of 5 years (Oğuz, 2010).
Lowenfeld and Brittain (1987) present a comprehensive account of 
    drawing, outlining six stages of artistic development in children, 
    referring to concepts such as age appropriateness and reflection. 
    Stages are referenced against the child’s age, or expected stage of 
    development. These begin with the scribbling stage (demonstrated by 
    children aged 2 to 4 years), followed by the preschematic stage 
    (age 4 to 7) where children are thought to show their first 
    attempts at representational drawings (e.g., a drawing of a person 
    with a circular head and “stick” legs), then the schematic stage 
    (age 7 to 9) where they demonstrate concepts and are much more 
    confident in their drawings as they resemble objects more than 
    before. Children between 9 and 11 years are “gang age,” also 
    referred to as the preadolescent crisis, and their drawings reflect 
    how things actually look and are expressed in detail, they also 
    become critical of their drawings at this stage. Between 11 and 13 
    years, children reach the age of reasoning. During this stage, 
    Lowenfeld and Brittain identify that children’s art becomes less of 
    a “spontaneous process.” The final stages of this model (which 
    approximately span the years of puberty, around ages 12 to 17 
    years) involve more detail, precision, and perspective. The 
    pseudo-naturalistic stage involves the depiction of perspective, 3D 
    objects, shading, and attempts to demonstrate motion. The final 
    stage of the model is the adolescent art stage demonstrated by 
    adolescents aged 14 to 17 years of age, and is said to refer to the 
    crisis of adolescence. Drawings at this stage can span a number of 
    styles. It is at this stage that natural development is said to 
    stop unless a conscious decision is made to continue drawing 
    (Lowenfeld & Brittain, 1987). Based on Lowenfeld and Brittain’s 
    model, we would expect little difference between the drawings of 
    adolescents and adults. For example, Lowenfeld and Brittain state 
    that once individuals are in the final adolescent art stage, skill 
    will only improve if the individual has both the opportunity, and 
    desire, to do this. In addition, Nicholls and Kennedy (1992) 
    examined cube drawing in children and adults and found that there 
    was no difference between the drawings of 14- and 15-year-old 
    individuals and adults. They explained that more sophisticated 
    geometry knowledge in the older children allowed them to produce 
    similar cubes to the adults. Therefore, knowledge of angles, 
    perspective, and scale in adolescents and adults might help explain 
    why their drawings would be expected to be similar.
Lowenfeld and Brittain’s stages focus on the process of drawing 
    and reflection of the art work, rather than the content and color 
    of the drawings. For example, if a drawing is of a dog then the 
    focus would be on the age appropriateness of the drawing. Analyses 
    may be carried out in a number of additional ways to provide us 
    with further rich information regarding the artists and their 
    drawings. One important element that Lowenfeld and Brittain did not 
    focus on was gender differences. Indeed, it is the case that very 
    little research examines color and pictorial content beyond the 
    elementary years.
Several researchers have reported differences relating to 
    content and color of drawings by male and female children. Iijima, 
    Arisaka, Minamoto, and Arais (2001) reported that males aged 5 to 6 
    years used fewer colors in their drawings than females, and used 
    more grays and blues, while females preferred pink and flesh 
    colors. Milne and Greenway (1999) reported that older male children 
    (between 10 and 14 years) used fewer colors compared with younger 
    males (under 10 years); however, older and younger females used an 
    equal number of colors. They suggested that pubertal males use 
    fewer colors due to the inhibition of emotional responses at this 
    time. Ellis and Ficek (2001) found that male college students 
    preferred to use cold colors such as blue and green, while females 
    preferred warm colors such as red and yellow. There is an argument 
    that sex differences in color preference may be related to the 
    evolutionary division of labor with females evolving to identify 
    yellow fruit, red leaves, and red and purple berries in their role 
    of gatherer (Hurlbert & Ling, 2007). In relation to these 
    findings, He et al. (2011) reported that males preferred blue and 
    green, whereas females preferred pink, purple, and white. They also 
    relate their findings to the hunter-gatherer theory stating that 
    men, as hunters, prefer blue and green, which are considered calm 
    colors and are related to the natural environment such as the blue 
    sky. Women, as gatherers, prefer pink, purple, and white, which are 
    said to be warm and peaceful colors.
Turgeon (2008) examined drawings by elementary school children 
    and found that boys used more cold colors (e.g., black and gray), 
    while girls used more pink, purple, and yellow in their drawings. 
    Previous research has demonstrated that younger children prefer 
    warm colors but as they get older preference shifts to cooler 
    colors. A common method of investigating color preference is 
    presenting pairs of colors to participants and asking for their 
    preference. When using this method, Child, Hansen, and Hornbeck 
    (1968) reported that children between the ages of 6 to 18 years 
    preferred cooler colors. Although most research on color preference 
    has been carried out with children, several studies have examined 
    color preference in adults. Ellis and Ficek’s (2001) work examined 
    color preference in college students while Silver and Ferrante 
    (1995) reported that retired male and females’ favorite color was 
    blue. However, when carrying out research with older adults 
    additional factors have to be addressed such as quality of eye 
    sight and potential color perception difficulties. Dittmar (2001) 
    asked adults ranging from 19 to 90 years to choose their preferred 
    and least preferred color. Older and younger groups preferred blue 
    but older participants preferred green over red, and younger 
    participants preferred red over green. Dittmar suggested that 
    changes in color preference could be explained by social influence; 
    older participants spend more time gardening or on walks outside 
    that may influence their preference for the color green. Finally, 
    Silver et al. (1988) examined color preference among college 
    students and concurred that males chose blue as their favorite 
    color more than females did. The content of children’s drawings has 
    also been investigated. Willats (2005) stated that young children 
    draw familiar objects while older children draw what they see. 
    Iijima et al. (2001) found that boys preferred to draw mobile and 
    mechanical objects such as cars and rockets, while girls preferred 
    to draw people and flowers. Turgeon (2008) found that females 
    preferred to draw flowers, sky, and animals, while boys preferred 
    to draw people. All of the previous studies examined the content of 
    drawings by children who were under 9 years of age, and thus it is 
    relatively unknown whether the content of adolescent’s and young 
    adult’s drawings would continue to demonstrate similar sex 
    differences. Young female children have been reported to use more 
    of the page than males when asked to draw a picture (Iijima et al., 
    2001; Turgeon, 2008). Female’s drawings are often larger but much 
    of the area is taken up by details such as grass and sky that 
    expand to cover the whole page. To date, no study has examined the 
    content of adults’ free drawings outside of a clinical setting.
Aside from the evolutionary derived hypotheses (e.g., Hurlbert 
    & Ling, 2007), sex differences can be explained through 
    biological and social theories. Biological theory hypothesizes that 
    gender differences are present from birth and are influenced by 
    prenatal androgens such as testosterone (Lutchmaya, Baron-Cohen, 
    Raggatt, Knickmeyer, & Manning, 2004) while social theory 
    indicates that we learn gender roles through observing others, and 
    via sex role socialization through education and the media (Katz 
    & Ksansnak, 1994). Turgeon (2008) proposed that sex differences 
    across a range of ages could signify that drawing has a biological 
    basis due to prenatal androgen exposure. This is supported by the 
    work of Iijima et al. (2001) who reported that females with 
    congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH; caused by exposure to higher 
    levels of prenatal androgens) drew more masculine pictures.
Koller (2008) discussed color preference in the context of 
    social theory. Products marketed at women were examined and shown 
    to consist of warm colors and soft shapes, whereas products 
    marketed at men consisted of colder colors and angular shapes.
Cherney, Seiwert, Dickey, and Flichtbeil (2006) state that 
    children’s drawings can be influenced by their education, culture, 
    and society. They state that cultural and society influences can be 
    expressed in drawings through the type of clothing depicted in 
    drawings of people. Girls were also more likely to add detail to 
    drawings that were seen to be relatively stereotypical, such as 
    jewelry, specific hair styles, and details such as fingernails on 
    hands. La Vooy et al. (2001) examined the drawings of Japanese and 
    American children for the number of smiles included, and found that 
    American children were more likely to include smiles in their 
    drawings. La Vooy et al. and Cherney et al. (2006) looked at the 
    heights of humans depicted in drawings and found that female 
    children tended to draw larger human figures. Both studies 
    concluded that the depiction of larger human figures could relate 
    to increased self-esteem and the individual’s worth in their 
    culture.
A question remains as to whether gender differences in free 
    drawing content and color preference continue to be evident 
    throughout adolescence and into adulthood. Most studies examining 
    color use and content in drawing involve relatively young children, 
    or studies that do involve adults often examine neuropsychological 
    measures such as clock drawing (e.g., Hubbard et al., 2008), figure 
    drawing (e.g., Guez, Lev-Wiesel, Valetsky, Sztul, & Pener, 
    2010), or evaluate changes in the ability to draw the human figure 
    across the life span (e.g., Ericsson, Winblad, & Nilsson, 
    2001).
To investigate effects of educational level (age) and gender, we 
    examined drawings of nursery school, primary school, and secondary 
    school pupils (all in their final year of study) along with 
    University students (in their penultimate year of study). Each 
    person was asked to complete a free drawing and had the choice of a 
    standard set of 10 colored pens. Drawings were analyzed for the 
    area of page covered, content (using an adaptation of categories 
    defined by Turgeon, 2008), number of colors used, and actual colors 
    used. The content of nursery children’s drawings was not examined 
    due to the lack of pictorial content. Based on previous findings it 
    was predicted that females would cover a larger area of the page, 
    females would use more colors in their drawings, males and females 
    would use different colors in their drawings and would draw 
    different types of pictures. It was also predicted that educational 
    level (age) would affect drawing content and that the number of 
    colors used and the actual colors used would change with age, 
    particularly around puberty.
Method
Participants
A total of 216 participants took part in the study: 47 nursery 
    children (22 males and 25 females) aged 3 to 4 years, 47 primary 
    seven children (18 males and 29 females) aged 10 to 11 years, 42 
    final year secondary school pupils (21 males and 21 females) aged 
    16 to 17 years, and 80 University students (24 males and 56 
    females, ranging from 20 to 51 years—mean age 21 years). This 
    research was carried out in Scotland, UK.
Materials
A standard set of 10 different colored felt tip pens were 
    givento participants (black, gray, blue, pink, red, yellow, 
    orange,brown, green, and purple) along with a blank sheet ofA4 
    paper. The area of the page was assessed using a Perspex grid of 
    200 rectangles measuring 2 × 1.45 cm. Details of eachparticipant’s 
    gender, age, and education group were recorded.Permission and full 
    ethical clearance was given to carry out this research in each 
    educational establishment.
Procedure
In the nursery school condition, children were given a piece of 
    A4 paper and the standard set of 10 colored pens and were asked to 
    draw a picture. Due to the informal nature, participants were not 
    given a time limit but were still timed; however, no child took 
    more than 10 min to complete their drawing. In the primary school, 
    secondary school and university condition participants were given 
    an A4 sheet of paper, the standard set of 10 colored pens and were 
    given 10 min to draw a picture. After 10 min, drawings were 
    collected for analysis. All the data were coded by the 
    experimenters (area of the page used, colors used [total number and 
    individual colors] and picture content). A standardized checklist 
    was used to record this information.
