Anstract
Child maltreatment is associated with life-long social, 
    physical, and mental health problems. Intervening early to provide 
    maltreated children with safe, nurturing care can improve outcomes. 
    The need for prompt decisions about permanent placement (i.e., 
    regarding adoption or return home) is internationally recognised. 
    However, a recent Glasgow audit showed that many maltreated 
    children “revolve” between birth families and foster carers. This 
    paper describes the protocol of the first exploratory randomised 
    controlled trial of a mental health intervention aimed at improving 
    placement permanency decisions for maltreated children. This trial 
    compares an infant's mental health intervention with the new 
    enhanced service as usual for maltreated children entering care in 
    Glasgow. As both are new services, the trial is being conducted 
    from a position of equipoise. The outcome assessment covers various 
    fields of a child’s neurodevelopment to identify problems in any 
    ESSENCE domain. The feasibility, reliability, and developmental 
    appropriateness of all outcome measures are examined. Additionally, 
    the potential for linkage with routinely collected data on health 
    and social care and, in the future, education is explored. The 
    results will inform a definitive randomised controlled trial that 
    could potentially lead to long lasting benefits for the Scottish 
    population and which may be applicable to other areas of the world. 
    This trial is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov (NC01485510).
1. Background
Child maltreatment is known to be associated with significant 
    problems in later life affecting both physical [1] and mental 
    health [2–4]. Intervening early can improve outcomes when 
    children’s social and emotional development is at risk [5], and 
    recovery from the effects of maltreatment is possible if children 
    are provided with safe and nurturing care early, ideally in the 
    first year of life [6–8]. Failure to do so puts children at risk of 
    disrupted attachments and poor emotional well-being [9]. There is a 
    growing international research and policy consensus on the need for 
    prompt decisions about permanent placement (i.e., regarding 
    adoption or return home) so that children can experience secure 
    care as early as possible [9–14]. However, a recent audit of 
    services in Glasgow revealed that children frequently “revolve” 
    between maltreating birth parents and various temporary foster 
    placements [10]. Moreover, there are no infant mental health 
    services focusing on maltreated infants in Scotland.
There have been attempts to develop interventions to improve the 
    mental health of maltreated infants [6, 7], but only one evaluated 
    programme was identified, the Tulane Infant Team in New Orleans, 
    Louisiana [8]. This is still in operation and aims to improve the 
    permanency decision-making process using a comprehensive mental 
    health intervention. Permanency decisions involve placing a child 
    in the care of one family until the child reaches the age of 
    independence. The Tulane Infant Team offers a tailored intervention 
    to every family with a child coming into care. It assesses the 
    quality of child’s relationships and the degree of change over the 
    course of the intervention. It makes considered recommendations to 
    inform the legal system about the best placement outcome for each 
    child. The aim of the Tulane Infant Team is to rehabilitate 
    children back to their birth parents, and when this cannot be 
    achieved safely or quickly enough, to free the children for 
    adoption. An evaluation based on analysis of routine data was 
    conducted four years prior to and four years after the introduction 
    of this intervention to New Orleans [8]. This suggested that more 
    children were adopted following its introduction; however, for 
    those returned to birth families, there was a significant reduction 
    in repeated maltreatment both for that child and subsequent 
    siblings. The limitation of the study was a consecutive cohort 
    design, and the lack of randomisation means that factors other than 
    the intervention may be contributing to the positive effects.
Deciding which are the most appropriate outcome measures for 
    this population is challenging. Gillberg [11] described the high 
    levels of coexistence between symptoms of different disorders in 
    early childhood, which he defined as ESSENCE (Early Symptomatic 
    Syndromes Eliciting Neurodevelopmental Clinical Examinations). This 
    demonstrates the need for a diverse and thorough assessment across 
    the various fields described by Gillberg [11], including general 
    development, language, social interrelatedness, mood, and 
    behaviour.
The overall aim of this exploratory randomised controlled trial 
    (RCT) is to evaluate the feasibility and to inform the design of a 
    definitive RCT evaluating a Scottish adaptation of the New Orleans 
    intervention for maltreated children. The specific research 
    questions are as follows:
(1) what are the size and nature of any effects of the Glasgow 
    version of the New Orleans model, the Glasgow Infant and Family 
    Team (GIFT), on the mental health of maltreated preschool 
    children?
(2) is a definitive multicentre RCT of GIFT feasible, 
    acceptable, and necessary?
(3) what would be the required size of a definitive RCT of 
    GIFT?
(4) what would be the optimal outcome measures for a definitive 
    RCT of GIFT?
(5) what are the beliefs, attitudes, and experiences of those 
    managing and delivering GIFT and an enhanced usual service, the 
    Family Assessment and Contact Service (FACS)?
(6) is GIFT likely to be cost-effective in Glasgow and, if so, 
    what design parameters are required for a definitive RCT?
2. Methods/Design
2.1 Study Design and Setting
This study is an RCT comparing two arms: GIFT (the intervention 
    arm) and FACS (enhanced version of services as usual arm). Outcome 
    measures from all participants are being collected one month after 
    a child comes into care and then again one year later.
The study is set in the city of Glasgow, Scotland’s largest and 
    most ethnically diverse city with an estimated population of 
    588,470 of which almost 6% represent an ethnic minority 
    (http://www.glasgow.gov.uk/index.aspx?articleid=3969). Children 
    represent 16% of the Glasgow population; over one-third live in 
    areas in the most deprived decile within Scotland, whilst only 3% 
    live in areas in the least deprived decile within Scotland.
2.2 Participants
All parents (or recognised parental guardians) with a child aged 
    between 6 and 60 months who come into a period of care due to child 
    protection concerns are invited to take part in the study. Children 
    are excluded from the study if
(1) they have a profound learning disability (as assessment 
    outcome measures would not be appropriate),
(2) and/or their primary caregiver is unavailable to take part 
    in the intervention (such as long-term imprisonment, death, or 
    being uncontactable by services or research team for 3 months or 
    more).
2.3 Recruitment and Randomisation
Recruitment is taking place over 17 months from December 2011 to 
    April 2013. An estimated 153 eligible children are expected to 
    enter care due to maltreatment during this period, that is, 9 
    children per month. Consent from parents and foster carers to be 
    approached by the research team to discuss the study is obtained by 
    the social worker who gives the potential participants an 
    information leaflet and a digital video disc explaining the study, 
    its intent, and what participation would entail. Thereafter, 
    informed consent from those agreeing to be contacted is obtained by 
    the study’s recruitment officer.
An anticipated consent rate of 65% will include approximately 
    100 families in the study, with 50 children in each trial arm 
    (Figure 1). The families are randomly allocated to GIFT or FACS by 
    the Robertson Centre for Biostatistics. Children from the same 
    birth family, regardless of placement, are assigned the same study 
    arm to reduce contamination (as birth parents are the primary 
    target of the intervention). Randomisation is also stratified by 
    child’s age (<2 and ≥2 years). The trial arm allocation is 
    concealed from the researchers who carry out the baseline and 
    follow-up assessments, and the first research assessment is carried 
    out prior to randomisation.
 Figure 1: 
    Anticipated number of eligible children recruited and randomised in 
    the trial between December 2011 and April 2013.
2.4 2.4. Care as Usual: Family Assessment and Contact 
    Service (FACS)
FACS comprises a team of social workers, which undertakes an 
    assessment of the child and the family in order to make a decision 
    about the child’s future care. It examines family functioning and 
    makes recommendations regarding placement outcomes for children. It 
    is able to refer family members onto additional services (e.g., 
    drug rehabilitation). Although FACS is an established service in 
    Glasgow, it was previously a specialised team assessing only small 
    numbers of children. As the delivery of early assessment services 
    in Scotland was known to be highly heterogeneous, FACS will offer a 
    new level of consistency and therefore is considered to be 
    “enhanced services as usual”. Any child whose parent or foster 
    carer does not consent to participate in the research study will 
    therefore receive the service from FACS.
2.5 The Trial Intervention: Glasgow Infant and Family Team 
    (GIFT)
GIFT is a structured intervention with the primary goal of 
    rehabilitating the child back with their primary caregiver, when it 
    is safe to do so. The team is multidisciplinary incorporating 
    social workers, psychologists, a psychotherapist, and a 
    psychiatrist. Like FACS, GIFT makes an assessment of the children 
    in the context of their relationships with their caregivers. Whilst 
    both teams assess relationships with the birth parents, GIFT also 
    always assesses the relationships with foster carers. GIFT arranges 
    referrals onto other services as described in FACS. GIFT also 
    offers an intensive relationship focussed intervention to every 
    birth family, which is anticipated to take between 6 and 9 months. 
    This intervention is aimed at improving the relationship between 
    the child and his/her birth family and according to the outcome, 
    GIFT recommends whether the children should return home or be 
    adopted. The intention is that all foster carers who care for 
    children coming to the GIFT intervention should be jointly 
    registered as potential adopters so that, if rehabilitation home is 
    not feasible, the child does not have to experience another change 
    of placement before achieving permanency. However, it is likely 
    that this will take time to achieve and that not all carers will be 
    dually registered within the recruitment period.
2.6 Outcome Measures
Baseline assessment based on the outcome measures is 
    administered at a minimum of one month after the child is received 
    into care. One month is allowed to let the carer get to know the 
    child as well as to allow for the child to settle into the carer’s 
    home. Follow up assessment of the outcome measures is then repeated 
    one year later. At baseline, the assessment is completed for all 
    children with their foster carers. At follow up, the assessment is 
    completed with the child’s primary caregiver at that time who may 
    be the birth parent, adoptive parent, or the foster carer - who may 
    be the same or different from the foster carer at baseline. 
2.7 Primary Outcome Measure
Infant mental health is measured using the Infant-Toddler Social 
    and Emotional Assessment (ITSEA) [12, 13]. This 166-item 
    questionnaire is well validated and is completed by the parent or 
    carer [14]. It covers a wide range of social and emotional 
    behaviours in infants, across four domains: externalising, 
    internalising, dysregulation, and competence. It has been used 
    successfully in previous interventions research with maltreated 
    children showing medium to large effect sizes and good longitudinal 
    stability [15].
2.8 Secondary Outcome Measures
A cognitive assessment of the child is undertaken. Children 
    under 2.5 years are assessed with the Bayley Scales of Infant 
    Development [16], while children 2.5 years and over are assessed 
    using the Wechsler Preschool and Primary Scale of Intelligence 
    (WPPSI IV) [17]. The parent or carer also completes the Parent 
    Evaluation of Development Status (PEDS) [18] which assesses 
    cognitive milestones including language, the Disturbances of 
    Attachment Interview (DAI) [19] which identifies symptoms of 
    attachment disorders, the Parent-Infant Relationship Global 
    Assessment of Functioning (PIR-GAS) [20] which assesses global 
    relationship functioning following observation of both play and 
    meal time activities, and the Paediatric Quality of Life Inventory 
    (PedsQL) [21] which assesses health-related quality of life. The 
    Development and Well-being Assessment (DAWBA) [22] is completed by 
    carers with a child aged two and above and is used to generate 
    International Classification of Diseases (ICD) and Diagnostic and 
    Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM) codes. The Waiting 
    Room Observation (WRO) [23], a structured observation for symptoms 
    of attachment disorders, is also completed by the researcher when 
    the child and carer first arrive at the clinic. In addition, the 
    Strange Situation Procedure (SSP) [24], the gold standard measure 
    of infant/toddler attachment patterns, is completed at the 
    follow-up time only.
In addition, the “This Is My Baby” (TIMB) [25] interview, which 
    assesses the degree of commitment to the child by the foster carer 
    is included as it may be investigated as a potential moderator 
    between maltreatment and outcome. 
In this exploratory trial, the feasibility, reliability, and 
    developmental appropriateness of each measure will be examined in 
    order to select the best measures for a definitive trial. In 
    addition, the potential for linkage of data with routinely 
    collected data on health and social care and, in the future, 
    education and legal services will be explored. 
