The data that were analyzed were unique in being unmediated by 
    researcher interests insofar as they represented children/young 
    people’s self-identified concerns. Research that has investigated 
    the experiences of people who have been abused is usually 
    “survivalist” in the sense that the abuse 
    experienced can be viewed as historical. As such, the data gathered 
    usually represents the retrospective accounts of adult survivors. 
    The records we were analyzing were collected from children/young 
    people who were often experiencing abuse at the time that they 
    placed the call to CLS. The records tended therefore to be written 
    in the present tense reflecting the immediacy of the child/young 
    person’s circumstances. The impact of this cannot be understated. 
    In reading these accounts, there was a sense that you were bearing 
    witness to the child or young person’s trauma—as it was 
    happening. The team’s emotional experiences of working 
    with this data resonates strongly with Moran-Ellis’s (1996) 
    reflections on reading accounts of child sexual abuse and her 
    observation that she felt “much pain by proxy” (p. 
    181).
It is extremely unusual for researchers to access the accounts 
    of children/young people who are currently experiencing abuse or 
    who have recently experienced such abuse. Children are not 
    empowered to speak about such things either in a research context 
    or in the wider sociocultural context in which they live. There are 
    also innumerable ethical reasons why many researchers would not 
    pursue or would be prevented from collecting primary data on these 
    issues from children and young people.
Over the course of the two projects, we analyzed 
    thousands of records. Coming to terms with the 
    numbers of children/young people describing abuse in their lives 
    was challenging. The scale of the suffering was enormously 
    difficult to comprehend. Both research fellows were exposed to this 
    data for prolonged periods of time and had to work with the data 
    intensively to deliver the research findings within the project 
    time frames. The emotional impact of intensively analyzing a 
    substantial number of narratives of this nature was cumulative. 
    Elinor wrote that after reading hundreds of accounts of sexual 
    abuse, she felt horror, anger, and a deep sadness that mere 
    statistical accounting cannot convey.
Deep Acting
Managing the sadness, the horror, the anger, and the realization 
    that children and young people were reporting their experiences in 
    their thousands was incredibly difficult and felt lonesome. While 
    we were able to enter into a dialogue with each other about the 
    emotional demands of the data analysis task during formal team 
    meetings, for the most part, the emotional labor 
    we each performed was a deeply private 
    actively. For reasons of confidentiality, we were required 
    to work with the data primarily within CLS premises. We were 
    therefore disconnected from each other during the substantive part 
    of the data analysis task. Managing these emotions while working 
    with the data in isolation required both Sharon and Elinor to 
    engage in an ongoing process of emotional 
    reflexivity. This involved us engaging in a process of 
    deep acting to perform the analytical task. 
    Here, we had to actively alter the internal emotional states we 
    were experiencing so we could carry out the cognitive work required 
    for data analysis.
Invoking altered emotional states was not an easy task and 
    required a considerable level of what Rosenberg (1990) labels as 
    “mental self-manipulation” (p. 11). On an almost 
    daily basis, we found ourselves attempting to try to overcome and 
    control difficult emotions in an effort to rid ourselves of them or 
    to at least mute their intensity. Sharon recalls the enormous 
    cognitive effort this internal work required to regulate, control, 
    reduce, and/or displace feelings of immense sadness and 
    bewilderment, and to quite often fight back tears. Sometimes, this 
    involved active attempts to replace these kinds of emotions with 
    other more pleasant sensations. To do so often required breaking 
    from the data analysis task to provide temporary relief.
Attempting to alter emotional states is considered by Rosenberg 
    (1990) to be a clear manifestation of emotional 
    reflexivity. However, the act of trying to feel something 
    different or to feel less can produce an ethical uneasiness. On one 
    hand, there is an impetus to perform the task, to be as Malcolm 
    (2012) states, “a good researcher” (p. 11). This 
    connects to concerns that the analysis may be impeded or distorted 
    by meanings produced in distressful conditions. Moreover, for 
    Sharon and Elinor who were novice researchers, there was a strong 
    desire to perform as “a good researcher” to other 
    members of the research team. Demonstrating analytical progress and 
    dumbing down personal struggles is one of the ways 
    through which this was sometimes achieved. On the other hand, there 
    is a personal desire to numb unpleasant feelings as an act of 
    self-care—something that Dickson-Swift et al. (2008) suggest 
    researchers working on sensitive topics should be proactive 
    about.
As necessitous as self-care strategies and deep 
    acting might seem, there were times when Sharon 
    considered that in trying to feel less, she was minimizing the pain 
    that was being expressed by the children and young people. There 
    were also concerns that a failure to engage emotionally—to 
    empathize fully—with the voices of these children/young people 
    could in itself produce a distorted analysis.
This confusion over exactly how one should work on emotion to 
    perform the analytic task and function on a personal and 
    professional level was salient throughout the research process. 
    Despite phases of intense emotional disruption, there were also 
    periods when we felt disconnected from the data. Far from being 
    viewed as problematic, these instances of disaffection brought some 
    much-needed relief, allowing us to “get the job 
    done.” However, at times we worried that this emotional 
    disconnection from the data would influence the interpretations we 
    were reaching. We had concerns that we had become inured to the 
    pain of these children/young people and worried about the 
    implications of this.
For both research fellows, their involvements in the projects 
    represented not only their first academic research posts but also 
    their first experiences of working with child abuse data. Fincham, 
    Scourfield, and Langer (2008) in discussing how researchers 
    experience their first encounters with disturbing secondary data 
    highlight that unless a researcher has previous experience in 
    working with similar kinds of data, their response to being exposed 
    to such data may be similar to that of a lay person. That is, the 
    emotional impact can be profound. Drawing on the commentary of 
    Cohen (2001), they argue that while researchers may have been 
    exposed to the particular topic of analysis (in their study 
    suicide and in ours child 
    abuse) on an almost daily basis through, for example, 
    media images, we cultivate a denial of the human suffering 
    involved. In the case of suicide, for instance, they argue,
We might observe that there are particular social 
    processes associated with the routine denial of mental or emotional 
    suffering that is in our midst. We are not thinking here of 
    far-away trauma such as famine and war, but personal suffering that 
    is in a sense near at hand. (Fincham et al., 2010, p. 
    860)
None of us were unaware that child abuse represents a serious 
    social problem for children/young people. However, and as we found, 
    there is a vast difference between a social awareness of these 
    issues and having to confront the abuse of children/young people 
    through being exposed to their trauma in the ways that we were.
Embodied Experiences
Sharon and Elinor both experienced challenging visual and 
    auditory sensations. They found that at the time of reading the 
    accounts and latterly reflecting upon them, there was an 
    alternation between imagining or picturing the events described in 
    the narrative and hearing the voices of children/young people. It 
    is incredibly difficult to describe or explain these sensations in 
    the written word. The visual sensations were akin to commonly 
    experienced ways in which we conjure up imagery when reading a 
    book. In many ways, therefore, we were “imagining the 
    text.” In reading the accounts, Sharon and Elinor found 
    themselves “seeing” the abuse happening. For Elinor, 
    these visual disturbances were so profoundly invasive and 
    distressing that it had a temporary impact upon her capacity to 
    continue with data analysis—She described this as “hitting 
    the wall.”
The auditory sensations were experienced as hearing the voices 
    of children/young people narrating their experiences. Although we 
    never directly heard the voices of the children/young people whose 
    accounts we read, we felt as if we heard them speak to us through 
    these auditory experiences. We ascribed each of them with a unique 
    voice. Where these voices came from we do not know. For Sharon, 
    these voices can still be heard. She can still hear children/young 
    people “talking.” There are certain narratives that 
    remain embedded within memory that can be accessed or played back, 
    or which invade the consciousness whenever this research is 
    remembered. There is one voice in particular that has never 
    left—the words of a young girl contained in a record that detailed 
    her sexual abuse and that ended with the capturing of these 
    words:
Where can I go, who can help me?
Sharon recalls that when she read these words, she was left 
    feeling utterly impotent, and it is our experience that engaging 
    with this kind of research never leaves you—The stories of the 
    participants remain and the emotional impact of witnessing their 
    trauma leaves its traces.
Embodied experiences such as these are identified by Rosenberg 
    (1990) as being central in relation to the phenomena of 
    emotional identification. Emotional 
    reflexivity, he proposes, requires an active 
    interpretation of identified signifiers, and the regulation of such 
    embodied states requires emotion work. When people experience such 
    states of emotional arousal without engagement in interpretive 
    process, these are considered to be nonreflexive states. We found 
    that we actively attempted to regulate these emotional states 
    through a process of emotional labor, and 
    through the strategies of deep and 
    surface acting to induce preferred states.
Being Disempowered
Feelings of “impotency” were a marked feature of 
    the analysis stage. This perhaps signifies where secondary analysis 
    of this kind differs from research that involves direct 
    communication with participants. Often, in reading children/young 
    people’s accounts, we were left with a sense of utter 
    powerlessness. We felt that there was nothing we could do to help 
    or make a difference to these children/young people’s lives. We 
    were party to their disclosures and their acts of help-seeking, yet 
    we could not act, and we could not help. We were not as CLS 
    counselors were or indeed as any other “trauma 
    worker” who encounters children/young people in 
    difficulty in a position to act. Working with this kind of data 
    strips you of agency. It positions you as helpless.
As an adult, your primary moral response to a child/young person 
    (or any other person in distress) drives you to act. The impotency 
    Sharon felt in relation to her inability to act—to either offer 
    comfort or counsel (as CLS counselors were able to do) resulted in 
    her experiencing a very acute emotive dissonance 
    between her personal moral and ethical ideology, and the 
    professional demands upon her to engage in the analytical and 
    interpretive task of a qualitative researcher. The ability to 
    “sit with” these tensions required considerable 
    resolve. At the same time, she felt angry about her perception that 
    society had failed these children/young people and powerless in her 
    ability to do anything about it.
Dissemination and Surface Acting
Throughout the analysis stage, we had to engage in deep 
    acting to manage our emotional states. However, the 
    dissemination phase required us to invoke surface 
    acting as a strategy to reduce the expression of 
    difficult emotions during public events. However, for Sharon 
    speaking publicly about the experiences of these children/young 
    people required her to manage her personal emotional states in 
    front of an audience “on stage.” Both projects 
    had a planned dissemination phase that aimed to bring the voices of 
    these children/young people to policy makers, practitioners, and 
    others we identified as important stakeholders in the lives of 
    children/young people who experience such difficulties. In the 
    first project, we held a media launch of the key findings to 
    invited persons from relevant agencies, governmental departments, 
    and members of the print and television media.
At such events, professional competence is under intense public 
    scrutiny, and one wishes to perform well. We all to a greater or 
    lesser extent had experience of presenting research findings to 
    various audiences; however, neither Sharon nor Elinor had 
    previously presented research findings that spoke to the abuse 
    experiences of children/young people. Presenting the findings was 
    not considered problematic to the team. Previous presentations had 
    taken place with a select audience of policy makers and had passed 
    unremarkably as these things often do. However, in this instance, 
    Sharon found it extremely difficult to control visible signs of 
    emotional distress and regulate her emotional 
    display when she was (re)presenting the experiences of 
    these children/young people
The findings are hard hitting and harrowing when orally 
    presented. We have noted how the presentation of the data from both 
    projects affects audiences—It perhaps disrupts their own routine 
    denial. When the presenter speaks, the reality of these 
    children/young people’s lives arouses a stunned and somber silence 
    that leaves the air heavy. It is almost impossible to be unmoved by 
    what is heard. The presentation for this media launch required 
    Sharon to read aloud the following extract from a young boy’s 
    account of the abuse he was suffering and what was happening in his 
    family life:
Always hitting him, when gets in dad usually drunk. Also 
    takes drugs—hash, acid, ecstasy. Has bruises often. Also battering 
    mum. Mum told him not to tell social worker about what’s happening. 
    He would like to move out or run away. It’s been happening for 
    months. Mum told him not to tell anyone out of the family. 
    (Male child, 14 years)
The research fellow struggled to read this extract without 
    breaking down in tears. In this instance, Sharon was unable to 
    “work on” her emotional expressional—Her attempt 
    to engage in surface acting failed, and she 
    worried that her professional performance had exposed her as 
    incompetent in this academic task. She has never read an extract 
    out loud again. She is unable to, preferring instead to invite the 
    audience to take a moment to read the extract presented. Each time 
    it is encountered, it is experienced as distressing. Sharon has 
    reflected upon the reasons she cannot read this or any other 
    extract aloud without emotional display but is unable to provide an 
    explanation. Perhaps it is because the act of speaking on behalf of 
    these children/young people—giving voice to their 
    distresses—transforms these narratives from text to reality. 
    Perhaps it is because the individual narrative of each child is a 
    representation of the pain of thousands of others. We did, however, 
    feel that dissemination gave us back an effective agency. It 
    allowed us to feel that in some small way, we were able to render 
    visible the struggles of these children/young people and make a 
    difference.
