Key ideas in social pedagogy
Petrie et al (2006) identify features of a social pedagogical 
    approach. We expand on some central ones here. These exist within a 
    general rubric of promoting individual and community wellbeing and 
    happiness; the thrust is to use and develop people’s 
    resourcefulness. The social pedagogical literature speaks of a 
    conception of the ‘rich’ child, in contrast to the ‘child in need’ 
    of dominant UK child welfare discourses. Similarly, we can consider 
    what might constitute a ‘rich’ adulthood or sense of personhood, 
    focusing on strengths and potentials, rather than deficits.
An ethical stance: Haltung
The articulation and expression of an ethical stance is 
    foundational within social pedagogical theory and practice. This, 
    rather than recourse to abstract rules and principles, might be 
    thought of as ‘first practice’ from which all else follows. 
    Knowledge and skills are both informed by and feed into a 
    practitioner’s developing ethical stance. This notion is 
    encapsulated in the social pedagogical concept of ‘Haltung’, which 
    broadly translates to ethos, mindset or attitude and describes the 
    extent to which one’s actions are congruent with one’s values and 
    fundamental beliefs (Eichsteller and Holthoff, 2010). Haltung 
    incorporates a practitioner’s orientation to ‘the other’ and might 
    revolve around fundamental philosophical questions concerning how 
    they think about others, what kind of relationships they want to 
    have with others and what might be considered to be a good life or 
    a life lived well. A social pedagogue’s ‘Haltung’ is intrinsic to 
    their ‘self’. It is that ‘self’ that the social pedagogue utilizes 
    in working with others and which contributes to the development of 
    suitably close and authentic relationships.
Head, heart and hands
Social pedagogues draw explicitly upon dimensions of head, heart 
    and hands in their practice; social pedagogy demands that 
    practitioners utilize a combination of intellectual, emotional and 
    practical qualities. This tripartite way of conceptualizing the 
    task is reflected in the training of social pedagogues. They study 
    a range of academic subjects but their training also involves 
    learning recreational and cultural skills. Unlike social workers or 
    social care workers in the UK, social pedagogues are prepared for 
    direct practice; they have a repertoire of artistic, sporting and 
    cultural skills that they can share with those they work with. The 
    ‘heart’ aspect of the task underpins all of this work. Social 
    pedagogy recognizes the importance and inevitability of close 
    personal/professional relationships between social pedagogues and 
    those they work with and the negotiation of appropriate boundaries 
    within these. This requires practitioners who are self-aware and 
    reflective.
Relationship based: the three P’s
Recent years have seen a resurgence of interest in relationally 
    based practice in the social work literature (e.g. Ruch et al, 
    2010). However, there are considerable obstacles to the realization 
    of relationally based practice. In a UK and wider Anglophone 
    context there has been a tendency to a fairly strict delineation of 
    personal and professional relationships. This fails to take account 
    of the inevitable interweaving of the two. Social pedagogy 
    identifies three ‘selfs’: the professional, the personal and the 
    private. It is only the private ‘self’ that is kept apart from 
    those we work with. The professional and personal ‘selfs’ combine 
    to support the ‘self in action’ endeavour that is at the heart of 
    direct work with people. We are, as the Scottish philosopher, John 
    MacMurray (1961), suggests, persons in relation. In recent decades, 
    social work appears to have lost sight of this fact. The importance 
    of relationships became subsumed behind increasing recourse to 
    technical and managerial ways of working. Changing Lives, the 
    21st Century Review of Social Work 
    (Scottish Executive, 2006) reasserted the importance of helping 
    relationships while theoretical shifts, such as the development of 
    desistance perspectives in criminal justice social work (McNeill et 
    al, 2005), reinforce the importance of relational qualities in 
    direct practice.
A lifespace approach
Close and effective personal/professional relationships emerge 
    in the course of everyday encounters, through being with another 
    person in naturalistic situations. Over the course of whatever 
    shift arrangements may pertain, social pedagogues take ‘as the 
    theatre for their work, the actual living situation as shared with 
    and experienced by the child’ (or other client/service user) 
    (Ainsworth, 1981, p. 234). This is what is called a lifespace 
    approach. The idea of lifespace has become a central one in 
    thinking on residential child care. One of the key texts on a 
    lifespace approach, deriving from the North American Child and 
    Youth Care tradition is called ‘The Other 23 Hours’ (Trieschman et 
    al, 1969). This title encapsulates the idea that what happens in 
    the other 23 hours, those hours when worker and client are not 
    involved in treatment or therapy is just as important as more 
    formal ‘professional’ interventions. The life-space is a mini 
    society in its own right, in which people learn to interact, build 
    relationships and feel included. The social pedagogue’s task is to 
    arrange the opportunities provided within a lifespace context to 
    promote social inclusion, growth and learning. Within such a model, 
    working with a client on issues of anger management, for instance, 
    might more effectively happen around the kind of disputes about 
    whose turn it is to do the dishes than through any planned 
    programme.
Activity based: ‘the common third’
Most social pedagogical practice does not take place in the 
    one-to-one meeting or counselling session but through shared 
    activity. Social pedagogues come together with those they work with 
    around shared activities, which may involve sports or craft type 
    pursuits but may also include activities such as yoga or massage. 
    This practice reality is encapsulated in the concept of ‘the common 
    third’. The pedagogue and the client share and have a joint claim 
    on an activity in all of its different stages, from idea to 
    execution. This makes for greater equality and authenticity in 
    relationships where professional hierarchies become dissipated 
    through joint involvement in an activity within which expert and 
    novice roles might be reversed or at least rendered less 
    pronounced. Creativity is a central element of social pedagogical 
    work. ‘Music, drama, dance and the visual arts open (student 
    pedagogues’) eyes to wider dimensions of existence and richer 
    possibilities for (those) they will work with’ (Petrie & 
    Chambers, 2009, p. 3).
The importance of context: ‘it depends’
Social pedagogy does not rely on abstract or universal 
    principles to guide practice. Rhetoric in a UK context around ‘best 
    practice’ would have little meaning in a social pedagogic 
    tradition, where it is recognized that every situation and the 
    actors within it are inevitably different and therefore not 
    amenable to any notion of a single ‘best practice’. What is ‘best’ 
    will be determined in the particular circumstances that pertain in 
    any situation. The importance of context rather than a reliance on 
    abstractions is recognized in Scottish philosophical traditions 
    (Smith and Whyte, 2008). Kilbrandon’s idea of needs rather than 
    deeds might be thought to evince a contextual morality through 
    decreeing that children’s behaviours can only be understood and 
    responded to in the social context within which they arose. This 
    emphasis on social context and on the everyday experience might be 
    considered analogous to the idea of a ‘lifeworld orientation’, 
    which is a central feature of German social pedagogy (Grunwald and 
    Thiersch, 2009).
Rights based
Rights perspectives are central to social pedagogy. In 
    Anglophone countries, rights have assumed a narrow contractual and 
    legalistic focus with a predominant emphasis on protection (Petrie 
    et al, 2009). In such contexts, rights talk can be reduced to 
    little more than a concern for due process. It is increasingly 
    individualizing and punitive social policies, especially in the 
    criminal and youth justice fields. The kind of rights deemed to be 
    important in social pedagogical traditions are broad social and 
    cultural rights. Such a focus was evident in the thinking apparent 
    in the Kilbrandon Report and the children’s hearings system 
    (Jackson, 2004). Such rights are rarely stand-alone or absolute but 
    need to be understood within a broad framework of human rights. Nor 
    are human rights abstractions; rather they need to be negotiated 
    and become realizable within respectful and caring relationships 
    (Melton, 2008).
Implications and impediments to adopting social 
    pedagogy
We suggest in this paper that social pedagogy might offer a 
    different way of thinking about and working with people, one that 
    finds resonance with Scottish traditions of social welfare and 
    education. The realization of this outcome, however, is not as 
    simple as merely deciding to adopt social pedagogy as a practice 
    model. A range of specific historical and cultural factors mediate 
    how social pedagogical ideas might translate in different national 
    contexts. 
It might be claimed that agencies or individuals in Scotland 
    already practice in ways that could be considered social 
    pedagogical. They may do, up to a point. Social pedagogy, however, 
    is more a way of thinking than a set of practices. It is also what 
    Petrie and colleagues identify as an organic system, consisting of 
    ‘policy and practice, theory and research, and the training and 
    education of the workforce, with each component feeding into, and 
    drawing on, the others’ (2006, p. 2). For social pedagogy to begin 
    to take root in Scotland would require that these various elements 
    of the approach be encouraged to develop systemically. Both 
    Changing Lives and Getting It Right For 
    Every Child speak of the need for transformational 
    change. GIRFEC describes this as the inter-play 
    between culture, systems and practice. Social pedagogy may provide 
    the practice paradigm to facilitate such change. 
There are obstacles that will get in the way of the adoption of 
    social pedagogy: social pedagogical thinking challenges assumptions 
    and practices that are deeply embedded in a Scottish context. 
    Perhaps the most obvious challenge it poses is to the dominance of 
    risk perspectives in contemporary practice. According to Janusz 
    Korczak, a famous Polish pedagogue, a child ought to have the right 
    to die. While this claim may appear somewhat extreme, what Korczak 
    is arguing is that a predominant focus on preventing children from 
    dying or from harm, simultaneously denies them the opportunity to 
    live fully in the present and to enjoy the right to life. Similar 
    arguments might be made across the lifecourse. Social pedagogy 
    requires that we rebalance our current predominant concern for 
    ideas of risk and protection to take greater account of ideas of 
    rights, growth and opportunity. The test of whether we can do this 
    will be when things go wrong. At a similar level, the proliferation 
    of external regulation that surrounds social care in the UK is 
    dissonant with social pedagogical models that give precedence to 
    ideas of professional judgment and trust. 
Social pedagogy also requires different guiding principles for 
    how professionals engage with those they work with. ‘Expert’, 
    supervisory or counselling type relationships give way to 
    socio-educational approaches, undertaken in lifespace and, often, 
    in group contexts. Workers and those they work with become 
    co-constructors of meaning or ‘fellow-travellers’ in journeys of 
    growth. 
There are, then, structural and discursive barriers to the 
    adoption of social pedagogy that run deep. One of the structural 
    barriers is political; social pedagogy is more likely to find a 
    home in social democratic political cultures rather than neoliberal 
    ones (Smith, 2009). In that respect, there are obvious resonances 
    within Scottish political and civil society and the broadly social 
    democratic approaches to welfare that have historically prevailed 
    across Europe.
On the other hand, social pedagogy offers a number of possible 
    benefits over the social welfare system as it has developed in 
    Scotland over the past three decades. While it is unwise to draw 
    direct comparisons in cultural contexts that are very different, 
    outcomes for children in other educational and care systems are 
    better than those for children in the UK, across just about every 
    outcome measure, from educational attainments to teenage 
    pregnancies (Cameron and Moss, 2011). While this might be thought 
    to be attractive politically, it should not be a clinching 
    argument. The whole notion of outcomes is a product of a very 
    different political and professional culture than that within which 
    most social pedagogical systems exist. Social pedagogy would regard 
    the process as much as the outcomes of professional involvement to 
    be equally important. It just so happens that if the nature and 
    process of involvement is right then outcomes are likely to be 
    better. It is difficult to disentangle the two.
