The promise of phenomenology for outdoor learning: a 
    critical introduction
Phenomenology explores the consciousness of intentional 
    experiences from a first-person point of view e.g., the meaning of 
    events, embodied actions and the importance of sensations as they 
    are experienced by the body. Through trying to fully explain 
    realities, preconceived ideas can be eliminated and replaced by a 
    new non-subjectivist perspective which ‘has to do with the 
    universal-personal, not the particular-personal’ (Martinkova & 
    Parry, 2011, p. 194). This is not a straightforward task, as 
    initial reflections on experiences can often be overly subjective. 
    Nevertheless, if successful, a firstperson ontology which is 
    informed by rich narrative description and reflection can enable 
    the links between experiences and knowledge to become increasingly 
    sophisticated and helpful in forming general statements which are 
    true e.g., in making general statements on the impact of human 
    agency on the natural world. As such, phenomenology can provide the 
    methodological foundation for experiences (thoughts, perceptions, 
    feelings) which help us to look better at the world we live in.
Merleau-Ponty (1968) explored in most detail how the experiences 
    and motility of the body can play a key role in our perception of 
    the world. Merleau-Ponty contends that lived-body experiences 
    should not be separated from cognitive learning; rather the 
    holistic nature of the ‘body-subject’ provides a way of conceiving 
    relations between the body and the world, which avoids over 
    privileging the role of abstraction and cognition (concepts and 
    rules) and under-representing the centrality of the body in human 
    experience. Appreciation of this point enables phenomenological 
    description to become more vivid than the “casual explanation which 
    the scientist, historian or the sociologist may be able to provide” 
    (Merleau-Ponty, 1962, p. vii). Thus, rather than being bound by the 
    dichotomies of reason/emotion and mind/ body, Merleau-Ponty 
    articulated a concept of lived space, where the bodysubject’s 
    experience is referenced through movement and language. While there 
    is some recognition of the socially constructed nature of 
    experience, it is the inclusion of pre-reflective knowledge 
    (experiences) of the body that enable universal-personal meanings 
    to develop. Consequently, knowledge is not something to be 
    understood in a inert and detached way, but is founded upon 
    integrated perceptual experiences which reveal ever more of the 
    world as we live and experience it (Merleau-Ponty, 1962). This 
    enables our relations with our self, others and nature to become 
    more visible. Thus, as pupils walk in a forest area, sensory 
    experiences and bodily awareness exist together within a perceptual 
    field, where at any one time parts of the experience e.g., the 
    firmness of the forest track or colours in the forest are 
    temporarily more prominent than others sights, sounds and smells. 
    In such instances, the continuous nature of comprehending our 
    ever-changing perceptual field is made more revealing and 
    understandable through our livedbody awareness, as the “body is the 
    fabric into which all objects are woven, and it is, at least in 
    relation to the perceived world, the general instrument of my 
    ‘comprehension’” (Merleau-Ponty, 1962, p. 235).
For clarification, Merleau-Ponty and other philosophers of 
    phenomenology when writing about ‘the body’ are essentially 
    referring to the ‘lived body’ rather than the ‘physical body’. The 
    earlier German language used in many phenomenological writings 
    enabled linguistically the lived body (Leib) to be separately 
    described from the physical body (Korper); an option which is 
    unavailable in the English language, where only one standard term 
    (the body) exists. Consequently, it is important that justificatory 
    accounts of the merits of outdoor learning, which are informed by 
    phenomenology, avoid the pitfall of treating the human body as only 
    a physical body that is investigated from the theoretical and 
    experimental perspective of natural science, rather than conceiving 
    of the body as a living body with its own inner point of view.
Pivotal to Merleau-Ponty’s phenomenology of perception is that 
    in making sense of experiences, we come to make more discerning 
    universal-personal judgements of situations. For example, we can 
    see how the shape of trees has been influenced by prevailing wind 
    patterns or as Merleau-Ponty (1962) notes, how through the shake of 
    a branch from which a bird has just flown, we can understand more 
    about the trees flexibility and elasticity. The capacity of 
    Merleau-Ponty’s ideas to identify how experiences which might 
    otherwise have remained at the pre-reflective level (i.e., beneath 
    the level of conscious cerebral awareness) can be brought to the 
    reflective level has been of interest to those working in 
    environmental philosophy. Some ecologists have come to see the 
    benefits of Merleua-Ponty’s ideas not just in terms of their 
    potential for human gains but more widely in terms of the “mutual 
    well-being of all life forms” (Cataldi & Hamrick, 2007, p. 5). 
    Nicol (2012) highlights this distinction as one which adopts a 
    nature-centred view of the world (ecocentrism or non-dualist 
    perspective) relative to the more prevailing people-centred view of 
    the world where the world exists primarily for human benefit 
    (anthropocentricism or maintained dualist perspective). In teasing 
    out issues around the detail of this distinction, Nicol (2012) 
    concurs with Toadvine (2009) in arguing that the case for claiming 
    that experiential learning can increase personal action with regard 
    to how we live requires both a degree of caution plus more refined 
    philosophical analysis. We concur with this line of approach and 
    consider that phenomenological informed ideas should not be 
    exclusively considered as part of a radical ecological alternative, 
    but rather considered a worthwhile avenue for further theoretical 
    and methodological analysis about how we can understand better the 
    various ways young people can develop an enhanced sensitivity 
    towards the qualities of the natural world. Such an approach 
    involves connecting with a wider field of philosophy than is often 
    the norm in many western countries. For example, in the United 
    Kingdom the dominant analytical philosophical tradition can lead to 
    an excessive focus on induction into pre-selected activities to the 
    detriment of thinking through the benefits of experiencing a wider 
    range of activities (White, 2011).
The three papers introduced earlier, have sought in their 
    various ways toexplore how young peoples’ connections with 
    nature-as-experience could befurther enhanced. Quay (2013) combines 
    a Heideggerian-informed phenomenologicalanalysis alongside a more 
    familiar Deweyian-informed meansconsequenceset of transactions that 
    are reviewed through cycles of analysisand reflection. Quay (2013) 
    considers that these two compatible but distinct approaches are 
    connected (theoretically at least) by a form of ontological 
    passageway. Thus, Heidegger’s ideas that personal reflections 
    arising from everyday experiences can connect with problem-solving 
    type learning approaches that are informed by the objective 
    conditions of the world can be used as the basis for pupils 
    thinking about the sum of their experiences. These contrasting 
    influences could, if supported by suitably skilful pedagogical 
    approaches enable, for example, reflections generated from 
    exploring green areas close to school grounds to be analysed as 
    both a holistic felt experience as well via cycles of problem 
    solving. Such experiences can also avoid being unduly exclusive or 
    excluding in nature. In essence, Quay (2013) advances two accounts 
    of how existence could be experienced as you move back and forth 
    along the ontological passageway: one aesthetic, wholesome and 
    holistic in nature; the other more integrated, balanced and 
    relational in terms of the analytical connections between self, 
    others and environment.
Doddington (2013) considers that Dewey’s relevance to learning 
    outdoors is aided by his focus on the transaction which takes place 
    between the individual and the environment. Thus the continuous 
    nature of open-ended experience is strengthened when pupils possess 
    initiative and are curious to reconstruct their experiences in 
    order to grow further. As experiences proliferate, Deweyian notions 
    of continuity mean that pupils do not find themselves “living in 
    another world but in a different part or aspect of the same world” 
    (Dewey, 1938, p. 44), as their thoughts and feelings become part of 
    a repertoire of flexible and suitably sensitised habits. Doddington 
    (2013, p. 6), on balance, does not share Merleau-Ponty’s belief 
    that action requires more of “an unthinking spontaneity”. 
    Doddington (2013) follows instead the Dew-eyian and Shusterman view 
    that reflection plays a key role in developing mindfulness in 
    lived-body consciousness. Specifically, she sees positive 
    connections between Shusterman’s (2004) strand of pragmatic 
    somaesthetics and the capacity of pupils to cultivate interest and 
    good habits as a result of their lived-body experiences when 
    learning outdoors. Doddington (2013) also highlights how those who 
    are inclined to follow more phenomenological informed methodologies 
    would benefit, in the context of school education, of considering 
    how analytical outcomes categories can be derived from holistic 
    outdoor learning experiences in order that the standard metrics for 
    measuring curriculum effectiveness can be achieved.
Nicol (2012) emphasises the particular contribution outdoor 
    learning can play in environmental and sustainable education. He 
    articulates how this could happen by teasing out a relational 
    framework of epistemological diversity which is based around 
    experiential, presentational, propositionaland practical 
    considerations providing the linkage necessary between the personal 
    and the environmental (universal). Nicol’s (2012) dualism views are 
    different to Quay’s (2013) and Doddington (2013) position, in that 
    he argues for a form of pluralist thinking where there is a more 
    definite role for abstract (objective) knowledge alongside personal 
    experience, and where seeking dualist alternatives is not required. 
    This approach is considered necessary given the rapid depletion 
    there is in the world’s finite resources. Thus, Nicol (2012, p. 4) 
    sees the benefit of integrating the self with “a reality that is 
    entirely independent of our thinking selves”; as possible, for 
    example, by blending objective scientific data on climate change 
    with our more personalised experiences of such matters. Nurturing 
    such subjective and objective links could improve the 
    interdisciplinary curriculum prospects for outdoor learning 
    provided (once again) that they are accompanied by suitably nuanced 
    pedagogical practices. Nicol’s (2012) approach is ones which tries 
    to avoid placing an unreasonable burden of expectation on the 
    elemental possibilities of phenomenological methodologies. Such 
    thinking reflects Merleau-Ponty’s view that it is not necessary to 
    distinguish or prioritise the particular ways in which cultural and 
    natural worlds should be viewed. It also connects with Searle’s 
    (2002) view that we should view consciousness holistically and not 
    unduly separate out, for example, the visual and the tactile from 
    our streams of thought.
In summary, the three authors from their contrasting 
    perspectives engage with a range of epistemological and ontological 
    considerations that have interesting implications for the ways in 
    which teachers construct outdoor learning experiences. However, the 
    focus in these papers is rarely on the specific values which might 
    underpin pupils’ personal growth, even though Nicol (2012, p. 7) 
    recognises that to “discriminate between ‘educative’ and 
    ‘miseducative’ experience one must turn to values or ethics for 
    guidance”. This raises normative issues about the values we would 
    expect pupils to develop in relation to their outdoor learning 
    experiences. The next part of the paper considers such matters and 
    specifically the types of personal values which could support the 
    development of pupils’ cognitive, emotional and contemplative 
    development.
Enhancing cognition, emotion and contemplation: The 
    contribution of Valerie Tiberius
We are attracted to the reflective wisdom theorising of Valerie 
    Tiberius; as she is one of the first philosophers to consider at 
    length some of the value-laden implications of trying to adopt a 
    first-person informed account of how to live well and wisely in 
    ways which avoid the ontological limitations of judgements being 
    either excessively subjective or objective. Underpinning Tiberius’s 
    critique are the sceptical and empirical influences of David Hume; 
    as evident by her referencing that a self-directed account of 
    living a life which you value should be based around there being 
    coherence between reflections and life satisfaction values, in ways 
    which ‘can bear our reflective scrutiny’ (Tiberius, 2008, p. 12). 
    Tiberius (2008) is concerned by the relatively modest reasoning 
    powers many people have and the limitation this places on them 
    developing the reflective skills necessary to evaluate how well 
    their lives are faring. The notion of interest and reflection being 
    taken forward is one which Tiberius takes to include more than 
    happiness or the hedonic pursuit of pleasure, and is based instead 
    on human flourishing. This includes a mix of subjective and 
    objective influences e.g., subjective concerns which recognise the 
    importance of individual needs (such as being absorbed in 
    experiences which engage fully our skills and capacities) as well 
    as objective societal influences (such as positive psychological 
    functioning and enjoying good relationships with others).
