1. Introduction: Current Context
Creativity is an area of great interest in the current 
    educational context within the U.K. Creativity in thinking and 
    learning is not a new phenomenon and has often been debated and 
    discussed not only within education but also the field of arts, 
    culture, and policy makers. Robinson (2010) suggests that that 
    education may reduce the creativity of children and Trevarthen 
    (2011) states that all children are born with the potential to be 
    creative. The publication of the All Our Futures Report (NACCCE 
    1999) and the subsequent Scottish report Creativity in Education 
    (SCEAG 2001) has led to an increased awareness of the need for a 
    greater emphasis on the role of creativity in the lives and 
    education of young children. There is evidence to suggest 
    creativity is enhanced when children are given elements of choice 
    and control of their learning, with a balance between structure and 
    freedom (Gandini et al. 2005, Ewing 2009, Davies 2011). If children 
    are understood to be active participants in their world, as 
    creative co-constructors of their world and as individuals with 
    their own views of the world (Jans, 2004) the extent to which they 
    therefore have opportunities to fulfill this disposition is 
    determined in part by the environments in which they spend their 
    earliest years.
In 2000 creativity was identified as being at the centre of a 
    whole-school ethos and Creative Development was 
    identified as one of the six curricular areas in the early years’ 
    curriculum in England (Curriculum Guidance for the 
    Foundation Stage, DfEE/QCA, 2000). The QCA later 
    published Creativity: Find it, Promote it (QCA, 
    2005) which was based on research into creativity in the primary 
    curriculum. Craft (2000: p. 38) identify creativity as “a state of 
    mind in which all intelligences are working together” which 
    reflects the holistic nature of the way in which young children 
    learn (David, Goouch, Powell and Abbott, 2003). Lassing (2009) 
    stated that young children should be provided with a variety of 
    learning experiences enabling them to develop long lasting creative 
    skills and thinking; in addition to variety children also require 
    sufficient time and opportunities to explore such experiences. 
    Cremin et al. (2006) identified that children’s creative thinking 
    and learning developed when provided with a flexible approach that 
    took consideration of the children’s thoughts and ideas. Runco, 
    2007 highlighted that creativity enhanced children’s learning and 
    development in language, decision making and imagination. The 
    ability to make decisions is based on making connections between 
    memories and link with the new experience in order to solve problem 
    (Claxton and Lucas, 2004).
Sharp (2003) undertook a review in the UK which sought to 
    present an overview of the current state of research and thinking 
    on the relationship between the arts and creative development in 
    young children (aged three to six years). She aimed to identify 
    issues, gaps and priorities for further research and found little 
    work at that time that looked at the impact on children of working 
    with professional artists in terms of their creativity. She 
    recommended that there should be additional research looking at 
    many aspects of creativity with young children including the role 
    of professional artists working with young children. The McMaster 
    report (2008: p. 7) has potentially refocused thinking on creative 
    learning as a “new cultural offer” identifying the dual nature of 
    the creative process which involves young children as both 
    spectators and participants.
In Scotland, there is also strong government support to “… 
    develop a shared vision for creativity and its role in learning and 
    teaching in the context of Curriculum for 
    Excellence (Scottish Executive, 2004) highlighting the 
    importance of the creative skills of children and young people, and 
    the characteristics which should be promoted by creative learning 
    and teaching in the arts and culture, and across the curriculum” 
    (Scottish Parliament 2010: 6). Grainger et al. (2006) have 
    suggested that creativity is not restricted to any particular 
    curricular area but is instead an essential element to many 
    subjects as it promotes the ability to solve problem and produce 
    novel ideas. This notion is not restricted to the formal education 
    system but is also applicable to other organisations and projects 
    which may involve, not only artistic and imaginative thinking but 
    the ability to be resourceful, innovative and inventive.
Starcatchers
Starcatchers is one such innovative project 
    which, funded through the Creative Scotland National Lottery 
    Inspire Fund, works in partnership with artists, arts venues 
    child-care settings and families to experiment artistically with 
    audiences of very young children, to encourage their participation 
    and to develop exciting, inspiring performing arts experiences for 
    children aged 0 - 4. One of the main aims of 
    Starcatchers is that “Creativity has a 
    fundamental role in supporting early child development” 
    (Starcatchers, 2011).
The project was built around four artists in residence who each 
    worked for a year in a theatre venue in Scotland aimed with 
    engaging young children and their families in a range of arts 
    related performance experiences in their local community.
The main elements from each of these four environments will be 
    explored in this paper in order to extract the key features of 
    creative learning. Laevers and Moons (1997) indicate that the 
    environment should provide children with opportunities to learn by 
    providing a safe context; peer collaboration and child initiated 
    learning experiences which provide children with ownership and 
    decision making.
An important element of developing children’s creativity was 
    described as adults and teachers providing a “safe” structure 
    thereby encouraging children to take risks, to question and to 
    think critically and creatively (Halsey et al. 2006). There are 
    however challenges for educators in providing opportunities for 
    creative experiences for children in a context where the funding of 
    these may well be in competition with other curricular areas and 
    determined by assessed outcomes (Walsh, 2010).
Reason (2008) uses the vehicle of philosophical enquiry to 
    support children’s engagement with theatre and to deepen their 
    experiences. He argues that theatre made for children should 
    observe that “A marker of quality in a cultural experience is its 
    enduring resonance as it engages its audience intellectually, 
    imaginatively or emotionally” (Reason, 2008: p. 1). The 
    Starcatchers approach is somewhat different in 
    that its purpose is to co-create arts experiences with children and 
    where possible with families and early educators. There has been 
    limited research about the experience of theatre for very young 
    children however this project provides an insight into performances 
    involving children from birth to four years old. The Starcatchers 
    project team instigated this age profile as it links to current 
    Scottish early years policy expressed in the Early Years Framework 
    (Scottish Government, 2008) in which a clear aim is to intervene 
    early with families from birth.
2. Methodology
The research took the form of a small scale exploratory study 
    focused on the development of the design of each performance by the 
    artists in residence. An initial review was carried out by the 
    research team to position the Starcatchers 
    Project in order to shape an informing theoretical framework for 
    the research. The data was gathered through the following methods; 
    semi-structured interviews with the artists, reviewing the artists’ 
    blogs and narrative observations, photographs and video footage of 
    each performance. Each researcher was responsible for observing 
    their partner artist in residence, sharing observations and 
    reflections with the artist exploring ways in which they developed 
    the use of the environment as a means to developing young 
    children’s engagement with performance and creativity.
Analysis of the artists’ blogs enabled the researchers to gain 
    “some understanding of the creator’s intentions and their impact on 
    the audience” (Pavis, 2003: p. 10) and allowed the researchers to 
    identify emerging themes in relation to the children’s engagement 
    signals.
The researchers identified key themes from the artists own 
    research tools which focused on atmosphere, aesthetics, process, 
    audience engagement, children’s involvement, and environments 
    (Dunlop, McNaughton, Grogan, Martlew and Thomson, 2011).
The observations were carried over throughout the duration of 
    each performance using time sampling and target child sampling. The 
    performance was scanned at 10 minute intervals and the observer 
    noted key point s related to the environment, the actions of the 
    performers and the children. The target child observations (Sylva 
    et al., 1980) recorded the child’s engagement signals throughout 
    performance on a 4 minute sample of randomly selected children. 
    Each of the target child observations lasted for approximately five 
    minutes, focusing on what the child was doing, who was with 
    her/him, interactions with other children or adults and behavioural 
    indicators of engagement. A judgement was made by the researcher 
    regarding the level of the child’s engagement using a set of seven 
    signals—“attuned”, “absorbed”, “mirroring”, “responsive”, 
    “interactive”, “instigative” and “experimental”. These signals were 
    developed during a shared research team analysis of the PEEP 
    production recordings (Starcatchers Pilot 
    Project, 2009) expanding a set of original types of engagement 
    “absorbed engagement” and “interactive engagement” (Young & 
    Powers, 2008). These signals informed the observations and formed 
    the basis of coding the narrative records, photographs and video 
    episodes. Each observation signal was scored against the following 
    criteria: apprehensive, tentative, attuned, secure or confident 
    (Dunlop et al., 2011). See Table 1.
