Environmental and ecological justice
The concept of ‘environmental justice’ is regarded by many 
    commentators as having emerged in the United States in the period 
    between 1978 and 1982, when the state authorities in North Carolina 
    chose to locate a landfill site for the burial of hazardous waste 
    in Warren County, where the residents were primarily poor and 
    African-American (e.g., McGurty 1999; Faber & McCarthy 2001; 
    Pezzullo 2001). In subsequent years, much of the discourse on 
    environmental justice (and injustice) in the US focused on the 
    disproportionate distribution of environmental hazards — such as 
    toxic landfill sites and chemical plants — in minority and 
    low-income communities (Stephens 2003). As Bullard (1999, p. 284) 
    stated bluntly:
‘All communities are not created equal. Some communities 
    are more equal than others. If a community happens to be poor, 
    working class, or inhabited largely by people of color, it has a 
    good chance of receiving less protection than its affluent or 
    mostly white counterpart. The nation’s environmental laws, 
    regulations, and policies are not applied uniformly which results 
    in some individuals, neighborhoods, and communities being exposed 
    to elevated health risks.’
In 2004, Schlosberg noted that, globally, most theoretical 
    understandings of environmental justice remained tied solely to the 
    issue of inequity in the distribution of environmental ills and 
    benefits. More recently, however, he has observed a broadening and 
    deepening discourse that has moved beyond this distributive 
    interpretation of environmental justice (Schlosberg 2007; 2013). In 
    these works, Schlosberg categorises three additional, multifaceted 
    and interrelated ‘conceptions’ or ‘notions’ of environmental 
    justice:
• Recognition. Where recognition of, and 
    respect for, various communities, identities and cultures affected 
    by environmental risk are integral elements of justice. 
• Capabilities. Where justice is considered 
    in terms of the extent to which environmental policies and 
    decisions restrict or enhance the basic functioning of individuals 
    and communities. 
• Participation and procedural justice. Where 
    the construction of inclusive, participatory decision-making 
    institutions is at the centre of environmental justice demands; 
    where policymaking procedures institutionalise and encourage active 
    public participation, and recognise local community knowledge.
Given that the current author’s research has focused on the 
    extent to which citizens were informed about, and could participate 
    in, the planning processes surrounding the development of two 
    sparsely populated and environmentally sensitive coastal sites, it 
    is with the last of these notions — procedural environmental 
    justice — that much of this paper is concerned. Equally, though, 
    this paper considers the concept of ecological justice in relation 
    to the two coastal developments. Baxter (2000) attributes the 
    coining of the term ‘ecological justice’ to Low and Gleeson, who 
    defined it as the ‘justice of the relationship between humans and 
    the rest of the natural world’ (Low and Gleeson 1998, p. 2), and 
    who further declared:
‘The first principle of ecological justice is that every 
    natural entity is entitled to enjoy the fullness of its own form of 
    life. Non-human nature is entitled to moral consideration.’ 
    (Low and Gleeson 1998, p. 156)
Parris et al. (2014, p. 71), meanwhile, define ecological 
    justice as the ‘extent to which human activity treats the natural 
    world with respect and dignity to insure the well-being of 
    non-human species, flora, and the physical landscape’. Drawing on 
    these definitions, this paper considers ecological justice in terms 
    of the extent to which the environmental planning conditions 
    attached to the gas terminal and golf course projects were met by 
    the respective developers, and, by extension, the ways in which the 
    flora, fauna and landforms were protected, maintained or restored 
    during and after the construction phases of the two 
    developments.
Environmental justice and information access in 
    Scotland
Environmental justice first emerged as a concept in Scotland in 
    1999, when Friends of the Earth Scotland (FoES) launched a campaign 
    to coincide with the inauguration of the new Scottish 
    Parliament2For those readers unfamiliar with the 
    legislative situation in the United Kingdom, dramatic 
    constitutional changes in the late 1990s saw the devolution of some 
    legislative powers from central government in London to three new 
    devolved bodies: the Scottish Parliament, the National Assembly for 
    Wales and the Northern Ireland Assembly. The devolved matters on 
    which the Scottish Parliament can pass laws include: agriculture; 
    civil and criminal justice; education; environment; health; 
    housing; local government; planning; social work; sport and the 
    arts; and transport. At the time of writing, the UK is on the eve 
    of potentially its most significant constitutional change in over 
    300 years: the Scottish independence referendum on 18 September 
    2014 may result in the end of the UK in its present 
    form.. FoES’s initial understanding of environmental 
    justice linked class-based environmental maldistributions in 
    Scotland with global inequalities in the consumption of ecological 
    resources (Scandrett, Dunion & McBride 2000). The first 
    official recognition of environmental justice in Scotland came in a 
    2002 speech by the then First Minister Jack McConnell (BBC News 
    2002), although Slater and Pedersen (2009) observe that he made no 
    clear distinction between the concepts of social justice, 
    environmental justice and sustainable development. From that point 
    onwards, the Scottish Executive (rebranded as the Scottish 
    Government in 2007) approached environmental justice from both the 
    distributive and procedural perspectives (Slater & Pedersen 
    2009), although Maschewsky was critical of the lack of a clear 
    strategy and of the Scottish Executive’s practice of following an 
    ‘embedded’ political approach, where environmental justice was 
    ‘smuggled’ into existing programmes with ‘little or no changes in 
    targets, priorities and funding-schemes’ (Maschewsky 2005, pp. 
    24-25).
As Slater and Pedersen (2009) point out, many of the procedural 
    changes to Scottish legislation have reflected the Scottish 
    Government’s obligations under European law. Key here was the 1998 
    Aarhus Convention on Access to Information, Public Participation in 
    Decision-Making and Access to Justice in Environmental Matters 
    which recognised that:
‘improved access to information and public participation 
    in decision-making enhance the quality and the implementation of 
    decisions, contribute to public awareness of environmental issues, 
    give the public the opportunity to express its concerns and enable 
    public authorities to take due account of such concerns’ 
    (United Nations Economic Commission for Europe 1998, p. 2).
As its full title implies, the Aarhus Convention is built upon 
    three ‘pillars’ — access to information, public participation, and 
    access to justice — the first two of which were the subject of 
    European Directives in 2003. Directive 2003/4/EC was concerned with 
    public access to environmental information, which was defined as 
    information on:
• the state of the elements of the environment (i.e. air, water, 
    soil, etc.) and the factors affecting these; 
• the measures or activities designed to protect these elements, 
    and the analyses and assumptions associated with these; 
• reports on the implementation of environmental legislation; 
    and 
• the state of human health and safety as they are affected by 
    the state of the elements of the environment (adapted from European 
    Parliament and Council of the European Union 2003a, Article 2(1) 
    ).
Directive 2003/35/EC, meanwhile, was concerned with providing 
    for public participation in the drawing up of certain plans and 
    programs relating to the environment (European Parliament and 
    Council of the European Union 2003b). A proposal for a Directive on 
    access to justice in environmental matters, which might address the 
    third pillar of the Aarhus Convention, has yet to be adopted 
    (European Commission 2014).
In Scotland, responses to Directive 2003/35/EC on public 
    participation have included: the introduction of the Environmental 
    Assessment (Scotland) Act 2005 which ensures that environmental 
    assessments are carried out in relation to public sector 
    development plans and programs; amendments to existing 
    environmental impact assessment regulations (in place since 1999) 
    which granted standing before the courts to any non-governmental 
    organisation promoting environmental protection (Environmental 
    Impact Assessment (Scotland) Amendment Regulations 2006); and the 
    introduction of the Planning etc. (Scotland) Act 2006, which talks 
    repeatedly of ‘involving the public at large’.
