Asperger Syndrome is named after Hans Asperger, the Austrian 
    paediatrician who discovered the condition in 1944. Asperger noted 
    that such children exhibited a range of behavioural difficulties, 
    some of which could be severe. A few examples of these difficulties 
    included a child described as “aggressive and lashed out with 
    anything he could get hold of (including a hammer)” or “hit or 
    verbally abused other children indiscriminately” (as cited in 
    Frith, 1991, pp. 42 and 59). He also stated that they developed 
    early language skills and that “the cleverest among them can 
    overcome their difficulties by dint of sheer intellect” (as cited 
    in Frith, 1991, p. 63). He referred to the affected children as 
    “little professors” and maintained that they had high intelligence 
    and were capable of abstract and original thought. The paper ends 
    on a positive note in terms of outcomes, although Asperger did say 
    that “the positive aspects of autism do not outweigh the negative 
    ones” (as cited in Frith, 1991, p. 74). 
The term Asperger Syndrome was first used 
    byWing (1981), referencing Asperger’s work. She noted the 34 
    children in her study did not indulge in imaginative play and also 
    that they lacked interest in relationships. She disagreed with two 
    of Asperger’s points. The first was that her children did not 
    demonstrate early language skills. The second was that they did not 
    demonstrate abstract original thought and high intelligence. Any 
    special abilities they had could be explained by rote learning but 
    not by a deep understanding of the subject. She questioned the 
    hopeful view of the prognosis that was given by Asperger. Her group 
    of children had a range of problems, related mostly to their lack 
    of social awareness and need for sameness, to such an extent that 
    in one of the cases, the young person had attempted suicide. Of the 
    children she studied, she said that “the majority need help and 
    guidance in sheltered settings for all of their lives” (Wing, 1991, 
    p. 118). She acknowledged that some “manage to become reasonably 
    well-functioning and even, in a few cases, markedly successful” 
    (Wing, 1991, p. 118). In her view, however, this was not the norm. 
    
Wing felt that the best way to describe the relationship between 
    autism and Asperger Syndrome was to conceptualize them as part of a 
    range of disorders that occupy a continuum (Wing, 1988). A place on 
    the continuum could be decided on how seriously a person is 
    affected by a “triad of impairments” in communication, 
    relationships, and imagination. Professionals in the autism field 
    have now adopted the notion of an autistic continuum or Autistic 
    Spectrum Disorders (ASD). However, one of the weaknesses of the 
    concept of a continuum is that Asperger Syndrome is considered to 
    be a milder form of autism. This is refuted by researchers such as 
    Gillberg (1991) who states that Asperger Syndrome “… cannot be 
    dismissed at the drop of a hat as ‘mild autism’ and thereby 
    relegated to the status of eccentricities in a textbook on child 
    psychiatry” (as cited in Frith, 1991, p. 122). In other words, 
    there is also a continuum of effects within 
    Asperger Syndrome, ranging from mild to severe. 
Links between genius and Asperger Syndrome have been suggested 
    by Fitzgerald (2003, 2005). Using retrospective diagnosis of gifted 
    individuals in history, he suggests that there is a genetic link 
    between Asperger Syndrome and genius. The people he has diagnosed 
    retrospectively include Wittgenstein, Michelangelo, and Mozart 
    (among others). While Fitzgerald may well be correct in suggesting 
    a genetic component, and while it may also be the case that some of 
    these historical figures did have Asperger Syndrome, his 
    methodology is highly flawed. He begins with the criteria for 
    Asperger Syndrome and works from contemporary notes to fit the 
    subject into the diagnosis. While some people with Asperger 
    Syndrome have a special interest and a degree of focus that, when 
    coupled with above-average intelligence and a high degree of 
    support, can allow that person to excel in their field (e.g., 
    Grandin, 1995; Willey, 1999), this is not the case for all those 
    affected. 
An examination of some of the research into academic achievement 
    may give a clearer indication of how children and young people with 
    Asperger Syndrome manage their lives. Reitzal and Szatmari (2003) 
    reported on a long-term study examining academic achievement. The 
    vast majority of children had long-term difficulties in school and 
    their work was consistently below that of their peers. 
    Interestingly, they also reported that there are few studies on 
    neurocognitive profiles of children with Asperger Syndrome, and the 
    specific focus on academic achievement is even sparser (as cited in 
    Prior, 2003, p. 46). 
Manjiviona (2003) stated that, “one of the misleading claims 
    made by professionals working in this area is that children with 
    Asperger Syndrome have a distinctive cognitive profile, usually 
    incorporating a higher verbal I.Q.” (as cited in Prior, 2003, p. 
    56). A study by Griswold, Barnhill, Myles, Hagiwara, and Simpson 
    (2002) on academic achievement revealed a group of young people 
    with “an extraordinary range of scores, extending from 
    significantly above average to far below what might be predicted 
    for their assigned grade levels” (p. 98). Research shows that 
    within that part of the autistic spectrum occupied Asperger 
    Syndrome, there are wide differences. Yet, as Frith (2004) 
    commented “Asperger Syndrome has a special cachet that hints at 
    superior intelligence and perhaps even genius” (p. 673). 
One of the diagnostic criteria for Asperger Syndrome is a narrow 
    and obsessive range of interests such as inflexible adherence to 
    rituals or a preoccupation with something that is abnormal in 
    intensity or focus. There can be benefits to having a circumscribed 
    interest. For example, Grandin’s autobiographical account (1995) 
    outlines how her special ability has helped her design cattle pens 
    that led to a career in animal husbandry. In the majority of cases, 
    however, the child with Asperger Syndrome will struggle in trying 
    to accommodate their circumscribed interest with daily living. Klin 
    and Volkmar (2000) argue that, given the diverse ways in which 
    Asperger Syndrome can present in children, interventions by 
    professionals must be “highly individualised to address a child’s 
    specific needs while capitalising on the child’s assets” (p. 340). 
    
Asperger Syndrome is a fairly new diagnostic category, having 
    only been included in diagnostic manuals since the 1990s. There 
    have been few studies of how it is socially constructed. O’Dell and 
    Brownlow (2005) carried out a discourse analysis on media reports 
    linking the Mumps, Measles, and Rubella (MMR) vaccination with 
    autism. This was an interesting piece of work but addressed itself 
    purely to the MMR reports and not to the wider construction of 
    autism or Asperger Syndrome. Brownlow and O’Dell (2006) studied an 
    Internet chat room used by those with Asperger Syndrome, to see how 
    they constructed themselves. This group constructed themselves 
    positively and felt that they were the experts on their condition. 
    They were often disparaging toward professionals, but felt that a 
    diagnosis was ultimately helpful. The importance of looking at the 
    socio-cultural production of Asperger Syndrome from a critical 
    disabilities study viewpoint is highlighted.
Nadesen (2005) views the development of Asperger Syndrome 
    through a postmodern lens. She criticizes the use of the medical 
    model to understand Asperger Syndrome, and focuses on the 
    socio-cultural development of ASD. She argues that it must be 
    contextualized historically within its time and states that “the 
    public’s fascination with autism, particularly its high-functioning 
    forms stems in large part from the idea that people with autism are 
    technologically gifted and are particularly adept with computer 
    technology” (Nadesen, 2005, p. 4). Asperger Syndrome paradoxically 
    signifies pathology and special aptitudes, 
    especially in the mathematical/technological arena. This speaks 
    more about the contemporary power of technology, than about the 
    lived reality of Asperger Syndrome. 
Murray (2006) discussed how ASD is represented in films and 
    novels. He contends that ASD are now strongly defined by films such 
    as Rain Man (1988). These films construct ASD as 
    including difficulty understanding social situations, obsessional 
    preoccupations, and the “purportedly exceptional skills of the 
    autist” (Murray, 2006, p. 31). Murray states that art misrepresents 
    reality in important ways. He argues that the narrative space 
    created by film reflects back upon the concerns of the “normal”, 
    while the reality remains hidden. Finally, he commented on the 
    power of the media to create an image that is skewed to 
    “spectacularize” ASD by constant reference to exceptional, almost 
    superhuman abilities. 
This paper will enter the debate on how people may obtain 
    knowledge about Asperger Syndrome as a social and ideological 
    entity. Foucault (1972) maintains that “to tackle the ideological 
    function of a science in order to reveal and modify it” (p. 125), 
    one should question it as a discursive formation. Discursive 
    formations will have an effect on how practitioners relate to 
    children. The staff who care for those children with Asperger 
    Syndrome in out-of-home care can have the most profound impact on 
    the lives of those children. Hawthorn (2005) describes the richness 
    and intensity of relationship that a residential practitioner needs 
    to develop with the child who has a disability. If practitioners 
    are not prepared for the intensity of the task, they may fall back 
    on a habitus (Bourdieu & Wacquant, 1992) 
    that is drawn from the messages that exist in wider discursive 
    formations (such as seeing the disabled child as “victim”, 
    “tragic”, or “impaired”). Practitioners who are not adequately 
    prepared for their care task may believe that they do not have the 
    ability or temperament to carry out this job, and may move away 
    from the profession. 
The term “discourse” is bound up with use of language. One of 
    the most helpful theorists in this respect has been Fairclough, who 
    said that discourse was “language as social practice determined by 
    social structure” (Fairclough, 1989, p. 14). Language as social 
    practice usually comes in the form of texts, such as newspaper 
    articles. As language is determined by social structures, then an 
    analysis of language can provide some indications as to the origin 
    of ideas about social justice. Discourses are, in effect, ways of 
    objectifying values and issues within society. The study of 
    discourse owes much to postmodernism. Foucault (1980) stated that 
    language of itself gives clues to social structures lying beyond 
    the subjective self. The language and texts generated at particular 
    points in history give clues about the structures of knowledge and 
    power underlying them. He also said that power is something that 
    permeates social institutions and determines whose voice is heard. 
    The ideas of Foucault would suggest that aspects of social justice 
    may be determined by texts concerning Asperger Syndrome, which are 
    artefacts of the thinking which underlies much more than the 
    writing.
Methodology
This study is divided into two parts. One is an examination of 
    texts dealing with Asperger Syndrome and the other is a field study 
    of potential and newly recruited child care practitioners. The tool 
    of enquiry used to interrogate the texts was Critical Discourse 
    Analysis (Fairclough, 1989). Fairclough (1989) asserts that 
    discourses determine action. As he said: 
in seeing language as discourse and as social practice, 
    one is committing oneself not just to analysing texts … but to 
    analysing the relationship between texts, processes and their 
    social conditions (p. 21). 
Fairclough was interested in how some ideas came to be highly 
    visible and reported, while other ideas were absent. Reflecting 
    Foucault, he felt that people apply to their everyday 
    understandings of textual material an ideological lens that has 
    been socially determined and of which they are largely unaware. 
    Only by applying critical reasoning to the discourse can the 
    researcher move beyond superficial meaning and explicate some of 
    the discourses lying beneath the constructed text. Meaning-making 
    is a negotiation between the writer, the reader, and wider ideas of 
    social justice. This helps in gaining an understanding of how the 
    discourse translates into practice and contributes to the habitus 
    of child care practitioners.
The texts used in this study comprised extracts from 
    autobiographical accounts of people with Asperger Syndrome, novels 
    referring to people with Asperger Syndrome, and newspaper articles 
    about Asperger Syndrome. The bulk of the texts submitted to 
    analysis were newspaper articles. The reason for this is because 
    these articles form a significant way for people to gain 
    information and, potentially, to absorb ideological beliefs. For 
    the majority of people in Western society, reading a newspaper 
    makes up a significant part of their exposure to texts. It seemed 
    reasonable to include a range of articles to which child care 
    practitioners may have been exposed. Segments of two novels were 
    included because novels, like newspaper articles, are artefacts of 
    the thinking that produce them. Two autobiographies written by 
    people with Asperger Syndrome were included as a way to ensure that 
    the views of those most closely affected would be represented.
