New study shows Britain's windfarms avoided release 
    of 36 million tonnes of greenhouse gas in six years
 The Edinburgh study found that previous 
    estimates on green house gas savings from windfarms had been too 
    low
WINDFARMS have cut greenhouse gases in Britain by the equivalent 
    of taking 2.3 million cars off the road, according to a new 
    study.
Scientists said their results show that the air pollution 
    savings from windfarms have been underestimated in the past, and 
    the technology should play a pivotal role in Scottish and UK 
    government efforts to curb emissions.
The findings are detailed today in research by Edinburgh 
    University engineers who analysed National Grid figures for the 
    power generated by various sources including wind, coal and gas to 
    calculate the most accurate snapshot of it kind to date on the 
    electricity output of each, based on real - rather than estimated - 
    figures for every half hour.
They found that electricity generated by windfarms prevented the 
    creation of almost 36 million tonnes of greenhouse gas emissions 
    from sources such as coal and gas over a six-year period from 
    2008-2014 - the equivalent of taking 2.3 million cars off the 
    road.
The study demonstrates that previous estimates for carbon 
    savings underestimated the benefits from windfarms by around 3.4 
    million tonnes.
Dr Camilla Thomson, from Edinburgh University's School of 
    Engineering, who led the study, said: "Until now, the 
    impact of clean energy from wind farms was unclear. Our findings 
    show that wind plays an effective role in curbing emissions that 
    would otherwise be generated from conventional sources, and it has 
    a key role to play in helping to meet Britain's need for power 
    in future."
WWF Scotland director Lang Banks said: "It's 
    great to finally have an independent and authoritative study that 
    puts a more accurate figure on the massive amounts of 
    climate-damaging carbon emissions being avoided thanks to wind 
    power.
"We've long known that wind power and other 
    renewables were making a major contribution to reducing carbon 
    pollution, but it's fantastic to learn more clearly just how 
    huge that contribution is."
The Scottish Government has set a target to generate 100 per 
    cent of the country's electricity demand from renewable 
    sources by 2020, although current forecasts suggest it will fall 
    short by around 10 per cent.
A spokesman for the Scottish Government spokesman said: 
    "With 34 per cent of the UK's wind power generated 
    in Scotland, this reinforces the crucial role of both on and 
    offshore wind in meeting our international climate change 
    obligations.
"It is particularly significant that the study is 
    reported to suggest that a greater investment in wind energy could 
    help meet Scottish and UK government targets for carbon emissions 
    reduction."
A spokesman for the UK Government's Department for 
    Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy, added: 
    "Nearly £52 billion has been invested in renewables in 
    the UK since 2010, and just last month we reiterated our commitment 
    to spend a further £730 million per year supporting new renewable 
    projects over the course of this parliament."
Meanwhile, scientists have warned today that surging methane 
    emissions threaten to undermine efforts to slow climate change.
Concentrations of atmospheric methane, which can trap 28 times 
    more heat than carbon dioxide , are now growing faster than at any 
    time in the past two decades, according to a group of international 
    experts writing in the journal Environmental Research Letters.
The gas comes from natural sources, including marshes and 
    wetlands, but 60 per cent of it is generated by human activity such 
    as cattle and rice farming and oil and gas wells during 
    drilling.
Co-author Professor Robert Jackson, from Stanford University in 
    the US, said: "The levelling-off we've seen in the 
    past three years for carbon dioxide emissions is strikingly 
    different from the recent rapid increase in 
    methane."
He described the trend as "worrisome".
