The ancient pinewoods of Scotland resemble an ancient 
    landscape
 The Ancient Pinewoods of Scotland
Author Clifton Bain traversed the country to research 
    his book, The Ancient Pinewoods of Scotland. Introducing an 
    extract, he describes the haunting beauty of these woods and the 
    need to protect them for the future
Having first studied Scotland’s ancient pinewoods in the late 
    1980s, it was a chance camping trip with friends, 20 years later to 
    the remote Barisdale Glen that led to the idea for revisiting the 
    woods. Using sabbatical leave and snatched weekends I made my way 
    round the last 35 surviving pinewood remnants of the original 
    Caledonian forests, scattered around the Scottish Highlands. In an 
    age of climate change awareness these journeys were all done by 
    walking, cycling and using public transport, adding a whole new 
    dimension to the visits and often following in the footsteps of 
    great literary figures such as Charles Dickens, Samuel Johnson and 
    the Wordsworths. 
 The Ancient Pinewoods of Scotland
I found that travelling to the woods provides not just an 
    amazing wildlife spectacle but also an emotional connection to the 
    past. Journeying around the woods it struck me that the great 
    pleasure of coming across each site and the satisfaction from 
    completing a tour of them all, was something to share. Through 
    describing the woodlands and how to reach them I encourage readers 
    to visit the sites themselves and to witness the next generation of 
    trees begin their 300 year stand. I firmly believe that the more 
    people enjoy, and share the passion for, this dramatic and 
    awe-inspiring part of our natural heritage, the better chance we 
    have of ensuring the right decisions from government and landowners 
    to secure their future wildlife and natural splendour.
It is surprising how few people are aware of the ancient 
    pinewood remnants, tucked away in the far corners of Scotland’s 
    remote glens; survivors of woodland that cloaked much of the land 
    several thousand years ago. They have not gone completely unnoticed 
    however. Queen Victoria mentioned the splendid beauty of the 
    ‘ancient fir woods’ in her Highland Journal and in present times, 
    pine trees adorn tourist brochures as iconic images of Scotland.
The pinewoods offer an exhilarating experience whatever the time 
    of year. In spring and summer the scent of pine combines with the 
    sound of songbirds in the trees and buzzards ‘mewing’ overhead. 
    Purple flowering heather in autumn surrounds the woods which are a 
    colourful tapestry of green pine contrasting with the reds and 
    yellows of alder, birch and rowan. In winter the pinewood becomes a 
    Christmas card snow scene.
One of the most compelling features of the ancient pinewoods, 
    compared to commercial plantations, is their great diversity of 
    structure, with irregular spaced trees of all shapes and sizes 
    reflecting the different soils, slopes and water levels. This rich 
    mosaic of ground conditions is one of the consequences of 
    Scotland’s climate and geology. On well-drained sandy soils, tight 
    groups of naturally occurring, straight, tall trees can grow to 25 
    metres whereas on wet patches of boggy ground, stunted, twisted 
    trees often grow no higher than two metres, even after a hundred 
    years. Scots pines are able to survive in the thinnest of soils on 
    rocky crags and steep riverside gorges, where their exposed roots 
    and stems wind round boulders like the strong, wiry, limbs of a 
    rock climber. All of this diversity contrasts with the timber 
    plantations, where ground conditions are made more uniform by 
    ploughing before the trees are planted.
 The Ancient Pinewoods of Scotland
Within Britain, the natural distribution of Scots pinewoods is 
    restricted to the Scottish Highlands. Of the surviving ancient 
    pinewoods, the southernmost is a sparse group of trees in Glen 
    Falloch, near the north end of Loch Lomond. At the western edge of 
    the Scots pines’ entire world range sits Shieldaig, near the 
    Atlantic coast, beyond the remote Torridon mountains. The Deeside 
    forests of Glen Tanar and Birse are at the eastern limit in 
    Scotland and at the northern edge is Glen Einig in Sutherland, 
    although small groups of pine to the south of Ben Hope may be the 
    most northerly individual trees.
An essential characteristic of these ancient pinewoods is that 
    the trees have naturally seeded and grown to maturity, repeating 
    the cycle of life and death over thousands of years. Spectacular 
    wildlife has found refuge in this diverse and mature habitat. Past 
    changes in climate and human activity have taken their toll on the 
    original tree cover. Most notable over the last 200 years has been 
    the huge increase in managed herds of sheep and deer grazing on 
    young trees. In some places the oldest trees are nearing the end of 
    their life without a single sapling having survived to replace 
    them.
Fortunately, dedicated effort has led to great improvements in 
    the management and legal protection of the Caledonian pinewoods (as 
    they are officially named under wildlife law) helping turn their 
    fate around. This is one of the great success stories in nature 
    conservation but there is still a challenge ahead in managing this 
    vulnerable and important habitat.
For many people the ancient pinewoods convey the atmosphere of a 
    primeval forest, but scientists and historians have cautioned 
    against viewing these as untouched remnants. Even the most natural 
    of woods in Scotland has had some human influence over thousands of 
    years. Pinewoods are also dynamic, with the woodland boundaries 
    slowly shifting across the landscape in waves of tree death and new 
    growth on the margins. A few, but certainly not all, woods may well 
    have moved several miles from their original location over the 
    centuries. However, with the youngest sites at least several 
    centuries old there is no doubt that, in the words of Steven and 
    Carlisle’s milestone 1959 book The Native Pinewoods of Scotland: 
    ‘to stand in them is to feel the past’. 
