Drug-resistant bugs greater danger than cancer, warns 
    report 
 No new class of antibiotic has been 
    seen for decades because of a lack of incentive for investment in 
    research and development. Picture: AP 
The growing resistance to drugs used to treat 
    infections should be treated as an “economic and security threat”, 
    according to an international action plan.
Tackling antimicrobial resistance (AMR) is “absolutely 
    essential”, said Lord Jim O’Neill as he published a global plan to 
    prevent drug-resistant infections and defeat the rise of so-called 
    superbugs.
Lord O’Neill described the increasing resistance to antibiotic 
    drugs as “facing a growing enemy with a largely depleted 
    armoury”.
Chancellor George Osborne said that the review provided a “stark 
    warning” that AMR will become a greater threat to mankind than 
    cancer.
As well as being a threat to health, AMR is also a threat to the 
    global economy, he said as he called on finance ministries to come 
    together to agree a way to tackle the threat.
One proposal is that drug companies should be rewarded with a 
    billion dollars if they develop new antibiotics.
The report warns that if antibiotics lose their effectiveness 
    then key procedures – including gut surgery, caesarean sections, 
    joint replacements and chemotherapy – could be too dangerous to 
    perform.
Projections suggest that if nothing is done to control AMR, 
    there will be 10 million deaths a year by 2050. Failure to act will 
    also cost the world over 100 trillion US dollars in lost output.
The review says no new class of antibiotic has been seen for 
    decades because of a lack of incentive for investment in research 
    and development. 
Lord O’Neill wrote: “We need to tackle the supply problem: we 
    need new drugs to replace ones that are not working any more 
    because of resistance.
“We have not seen a truly new class of antibiotics for decades. 
    It is in policy makers’ hands to change this. We have recommended 
    that countries review carefully how they buy and price antibiotics, 
    to reward innovative new drugs without encouraging unnecessary use 
    of new antibiotics.”
The review says the proposal should be financed through 
    governments, international institutions and taxation on current 
    antibiotics. It suggests drug companies who do not invest in AMR 
    research should pay an “antibiotic investment charge”.
“Apart from the moral case ... the economic cost of failing to 
    act is too great to contemplate,” Mr Osborne said.
“So I am calling on other finance ministries to come together 
    this year and, with industry leaders and medical experts, agree a 
    common approach.” 
