'Remarkable' 19 metre North Atlantic wave sets 
    new world record
'Remarkable' 19 metre North 
    Atlantic wave sets new world record 
A 19-metre wave miles off the Outer Hebrides has been recorded 
    as the highest-ever detected by a buoy. 
Initially recorded in the North Atlantic on February 4 2013, the 
    wave has now been analysed by an expert committee of the World 
    Meteorological Organisation (WMO) and marked as a new world 
    record.
It followed the passage of a very strong cold front, which 
    produced winds of more than 50mph in the area between the UK and 
    Iceland.
The buoy that recorded the wave is a part of the Met 
    Office's network of marine automatic weather stations.
The WMO commission for climatology's extremes evaluation 
    committee - made up of scientists from the UK, US, Canada and Spain 
    - classified it as "the highest significant wave height as 
    measured by a buoy".
The previous record of 18.275m was measured on December 8 2007, 
    also in the North Atlantic.
WMO assistant secretary-general Wenjian Zhang said: 
    "This is the first time we have ever measured a wave of 
    19 metres. It is a remarkable record.
"It highlights the importance of meteorological and 
    ocean observations and forecasts to ensure the safety of the global 
    maritime industry and to protect the lives of crew and passengers 
    on busy shipping lanes.
"We need high-quality and extensive ocean records to 
    help in our understanding of weather/ocean interactions.
"Despite the huge strides in satellite technology, 
    the sustained observations and data records from moored and 
    drifting buoys and ships still play a major role in this 
    respect."
Experts say the highest waves typically occur in the North 
    Atlantic, with wind circulation and atmospheric pressure in winter 
    leading to extra-tropical storms often referred to as 
    "bombs".
The new record will be added to an archive that includes the 
    world's highest and lowest temperatures, rainfall, heaviest 
    hailstone, longest dry period, maximum gust of wind and other 
    climate extremes.
Randall Cerveny, joint rapporteur on world records of climate 
    and weather extremes for WMO, said: "The new world 
    record will be added to the official WMO archive of weather and 
    climate extremes which is being constantly updated and expanded 
    thanks to continued improvements in instrumentation, technology and 
    analysis.
"Oceans cover some 70% of the world's surface. 
    Ocean observations are, therefore, critical to understanding and 
    forecasting our weather and climate."
