 What impact will climate change have on Scotland? 
    

While climate change is no longer news to anyone, it 
    can seem like an arbitrary concept; a term bandied about by 
    politicians and cited by campaigners. But its effects, caused by 
    all of us, will be felt by all of us. Scotland – its wildlife and 
    landscapes – is already experiencing the consequences of our 
    changing climate, and we are only likely to see more of these if 
    the changes continue at their current rate. Here are some of the 
    ways Scotland will feel the impact. 
Coastal habitats could be lost 
 
If sea levels continue to rise at current rates, as a result of 
    the melting of the polar ice caps in the face of rising sea 
    temperatures, some of Scotland’s coastal habitats could be lost 
    entirely. This is a particular concern in places where coastal 
    defences stop those habitats from migrating further inland. Right 
    now, 100 hectares of salt marsh and mudflats are lost in the UK 
    each year as a result of rising tides and the resulting erosion. 
    
Increase in flooding
Increasing rainfall and changes in rainfall patterns mean that 
    Scotland’s 50,000 km of rivers are likely to flood more often, 
    causing damage to property and transport networks, disruption of 
    services, loss of business, even risk to life.
Since monitoring began in 1961, the east of Scotland has seen a 
    36.5 per cent increase in precipitation, while the north and west 
    of the country have seen a 67-69 per cent rise – leading to a 
    notable increase in the frequency of floods and landslides in that 
    time. The UK Climate Impacts Programme has predicted that in coming 
    decades the number and severity of storms in Scotland could 
    increase, leading to increased risk of flooding – river flows have 
    already shown significant increases over the last 80 years. 

In addition to rising rivers, observed sea level rises also pose 
    a threat in terms of flooding, as Dr Caroline Holmes, a climate 
    impact scientist at Edinburgh University’s School of Geosciences, 
    said: “Storm surges by the coast last January in Scotland 
    saw coastal flooding and damage to roads and properties, and we 
    will see more of that. Salt water intrusions will compromise the 
    safety of the freshwater supply. This is something we should expect 
    to see over the coming decades – certainly within our 
    lifetimes.”
The Scottish Environment Protection Agency has produced a map of 
    areas at risk of flooding, showing 100,000 properties lying in 
    those areas – nearly 4 per cent of Scotland’s total properties. The 
    cost of flooding in Scotland averages more than £50 million – one 
    flood alone in Elgin in 1997 caused £100m of damage, with 1,200 
    people needing to be evacuated. 
Rising temperatures
 Port Mor on the Isle of Muck.
Records show that average temperatures in Scotland have 
    increased by 0.5°C in the last 100 years. While warmer weather 
    might sound like no bad thing for Scotland, and will see a 
    reduction in cold-related deaths, rising temperatures caused by 
    climate change mean erosion and drying out of some natural habitats 
    that could threaten wildlife – some parts of the country have 
    become 45 per cent drier in summer. The first six months of 2010 
    were the second driest recorded in the UK in 96 years, which caused 
    river levels across the UK to drop by up to 50 per cent, leading to 
    fish deaths and canals being closed.
Dr Holmes confirms that observation, saying: “2014 was 
    the hottest year in the Met Office records dating back to 1910, and 
    the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change has ‘attributed’ 
    global increases in temperature to human activity. That is, they 
    can say that the increase in temperatures observed would be very 
    unlikely to have happened without human influence. The last IPCC 
    report suggested that temperatures are ‘very likely to continue to 
    increase’, and likely to do so more in Northern Europe than the 
    rest of Europe. Results specific to the UK suggest that in 
    Scotland, we can expect 1-2 degrees warming in winter and over 2 
    degrees warming in summer by the 2050s.”
If temperatures continue to increase at current rates Scotland 
    can expect droughts and heatwaves, which cause health problems for 
    young children, the elderly and those with health conditions while 
    increased sun exposure could see a rise in skin cancer in Scotland. 
    The heatwave of summer 2003 – the warmest period in 500 years – 
    caused 2,000 deaths in the UK, and the World Meteorological 
    Organisation estimates heat-related deaths could double in less 
    than 20 years. 
 Bruichladdich distillery on Islay.
Dr Holmes added: “Health is a big issue with climate 
    change. In July of 2013 we saw a heatwave, during which there were 
    health (and wildfire) warnings in all the papers, telling people to 
    be aware of issues like heatstroke and dehydration. In the future, 
    that kind of summer will become more what we expect, just an 
    average summer rather than an unusual event.” And while an 
    abundance of fresh water is something Scots have been able to take 
    for granted, drought will also have an impact on water quality and 
    supply. 
Loss of animal and plant species
Climate change will have a direct effect on many species of 
    Scotland’s plants and animals. Heavier rains will damage salmon 
    spawning grounds, while higher temperatures will mean less mountain 
    snow cover which will threaten montane plants. Disruptions in the 
    cycles of the ecosystem could mean that young birds don’t hatch at 
    the same time as their prey – caterpillars emerging before eggs 
    hatch could lead to a lack of food for chicks – and flowers may not 
    open when their pollinators are active. Droughts can threaten the 
    survival of young mammals, plants and birds, and it is likely some 
    species will be lost from Scotland if their preferred climate no 
    longer exists here.
Corsican pine, which is commercially important, is already under 
    threat from red band needle blight – a fungus which thrives in 
    climates warmer and more humid than previously found in Scotland. 
    Other plant species that live at high altitudes in the Highlands 
    such as Diapensia, Norwegian mugwort and cloudberry may not survive 
    as the country gets warmer. The bee population, which plays a 
    crucial role in our food chain, is already in a much-publicised 
    decline. 
New species will arrive in Scotland
Climate change has seen several new wildlife species begin to 
    appear, migrating from the south as the climate in Scotland becomes 
    milder and more habitable for them. While this may sound like a 
    positive increase in biodiversity, and most new arrivals will have 
    little impact on Scotland’s existing species, some will compete 
    with existing residents for environmental resources, while others 
    will bring with them the threat of new pests and diseases, such as 
    Bluetongue Disease and Lyme Disease. Invasive non-native species 
    are already causing environmental damage that costs the Scottish 
    economy £500m a year. 
 Glencoe ski resort
     .
Dr Holmes said: “The bee orchid was rediscovered in 
    Scotland in 2003 and this is thought to be linked to increases in 
    temperature. We have high confidence this will continue; plants and 
    animals (including marine species) that need warmer conditions will 
    be found here more often.”
The loss of the winter sports industry
The Met Office has warned that the Scottish skiing industry 
    could disappear, taking local jobs with it, within as little as 50 
    years as winters become too mild for regular snowfall, with 
    continuous decreases in snow cover already observed over the last 
    40 years.
With the winter sports industry worth £30 million per season, 
    according to latest figures from national governing body Snowsport 
    Scotland, this would represent a potentially devastating blow to 
    local economies in Scotland’s mountain areas, which rely on this 
    sector at times of the year in which other local industries such as 
    farming and summer tourism are dormant, as well as to the country’s 
    tourism economy overall – as well as the loss of opportunities for 
    sports and recreation for those living in Scotland. 
Changes to agriculture
Since climate affects soil formation, food production could feel 
    the impact of climate change – one of the most tangible effects for 
    the human population. Warmer temperatures could mean that Scotland 
    could grow more food, as Professor Dave Reay, professor of carbon 
    management and education at the University of Edinburgh and author 
    of Climate Change Begins at Home and Your Planet Needs You!, says: 
    “One of the most marked impacts of climate change in 
    Scotland over the last 50 years has been the expansion of the 
    growing season. Across most areas we’ve seen warmer temperatures 
    extend the growing season for farmers by more than five weeks 
    compared to what it was back in 1961.” However, as Dr 
    Holmes observes, “While some crops will thrive due to longer 
    growing seasons, crops that actually rely on cold weather over the 
    winter will more vulnerable as frosts decrease.”
Global warming will also bring with it the threat of pests, 
    diseases and non-native species which could harm crops and 
    livestock, causing economic difficulties and increased pressure for 
    farmers and food producers and rising food prices for consumers – 
    which would also be seen on our imported produce, as climate change 
    exerts the same pressures on the food industry in other 
    countries.
As Prof Reay says: “Our greatest vulnerability to climate 
    change probably comes through just how tightly connected we are 
    with the rest of the planet. For instance, a devastating drought in 
    the US can push up food prices here, while a major flooding event 
    in Asia can damage our export trade. It’s this global 
    interconnectedness that makes it clear that no country, even 
    Scotland, would avoid the negative impacts of climate change in the 
    21st century. We are all in this together.” 
Threat to the whisky industry
Summer water shortages could threaten one of the industries for 
    which Scotland is best known and loved around the world – whisky, 
    which accounts for one quarter of the UK’s total food and drink 
    exports.
With those exports generating almost £4 billion for the UK 
    economy – with 38 bottles of whisky being exported and earning £135 
    per second – and the Scottish whisky industry employing more than 
    10,000 people, many of them in economically deprived areas, and 
    supporting 40,000 jobs across the UK as a whole, any compromise to 
    production would present a major threat to jobs and the economy, as 
    well as a vital piece of the country’s cultural heritage – one 
    which draws millions of tourists to the country, and the money they 
    spend not just on whisky, but in the hospitality industry. 
Renewable energy
Ironically, climate change could have a negative impact on one 
    of the very things intended to halt its progress. Varying water 
    availability will affect hydro-generation schemes, and the changes 
    will influence Scotland’s capacity to generate weather-dependent 
    renewable energy – an important industry and major employer for the 
    country, currently supporting more than 11,000 jobs in the country, 
    as well as an important weapon in the fight against continuing 
    climate change. Climate change can also impact power distribution, 
    as seen in the damage caused by extreme weather events such as 
    floods and flash storms – the cost of which to repair won’t help 
    already rising energy prices. 
And finally... even haggis is under threat
Even Scotland’s national dish is not immune to the effects of a 
    changing climate. In recent years, Scotland has seen an increase in 
    lungworm, a disease which affects sheep and makes their lungs – a 
    key ingredient in haggis – unusable. Since the disease is observed 
    in warmer, wetter conditions, given the pattern of climate change 
    in Scotland its incidence is only likely to increase here. With the 
    haggis market worth £15 million a year in the UK and £1.2m in 
    exports to 28 countries, this is potentially bad news for our 
    economy as well as our Burns Suppers. 
