‘This is last chance for the Scottish wildcat’
CONSERVATIONISTS battling to save the Scottish wildcat 
    say a remote area in the north-west Highlands presents the only 
    chance for the species’ survival.
The “Highland tiger” is one of the world’s most endangered 
    animals. Experts estimate there may be only 35 pure-bred 
    individuals left. This compares with fewer than 2,500 wild Bengal 
    tigers and makes the wildcat 70 times rarer than the giant 
    panda.
The Ardnamurchan peninsula, which has some of Scotland’s wildest 
    landscapes and few human residents, has been identified as a 
    sanctuary. The Wildcat Haven Project aims to protect the species by 
    catching and neutering feral and hybrid wildcats in the area to 
    prevent them breeding with pure wildcats.
Geneticist Paul O’Donoghue, from Chester University, the 
    scientific adviser to the project, said: “Feral cats are the 
    biggest danger to the future of the Scottish wildcat. They 
    interbreed and you end up with hybrids of varying 
    degrees.
“The aim is to reduce and eventually remove the feral cat 
    population from this area. We want to catch all the feral cats, 
    neuter them and put them back where we found them, and eventually 
    the population will die out over time.”
Dr O’Donoghue and Kent-based charity the Aspinall Foundation 
    took over the project from the Scottish Wildcat Association (SWA) 
    last year.
In 2012, the SWA warned that wildcats would soon be extinct in 
    the wild after estimating that pure-bred cats had fallen to about 
    35 individuals, far fewer than previously thought.
As part of the Wildcat Haven Project, cage traps are baited with 
    mackerel and fish oil to attract the animals. If the traps capture 
    feral cats, they are neutered and released. If it looks like a 
    wildcat, it will be recorded and a DNA sample taken to show just 
    how purebred it is.
Environment agency Scottish Natural Heritage, which has 
    estimated there could be 150 breeding pairs left, is backing moves 
    in other areas, including the Cairngorms, to assess the threat to 
    the species and work out ways to preserve it.
However, Dr O’Donoghue said time was running out.
“The Scottish wildcat is one of, if not the, most 
    endangered animal on the planet,” he said. “Recent 
    estimates put it at around 35 individuals. To put that in context, 
    that’s 70 times rarer than the giant pandas.
“Without doubt this is the only chance the Scottish 
    wildcat’s got. This is the only project that’s out there dealing 
    with the issue of hybridisation.
“It’s only by dealing with this issue you’ve got any 
    chance at all of saving the Scottish wildcat, and this is the only 
    safe haven in Scotland now.”
The Ardnamurchan peninsula covers about 300 square miles and 
    there may be only a few pure-bred wildcats living in that area. But 
    the scientists believe those animals provide the best chance to 
    save the species.
The Scottish wildcat – Felis silvestris 
    grampia – is the only wild member of the cat 
    family to survive in Britain.
