Scots clinical trial out to give older people more 
    muscle
 Participants will be tested on muscle 
    strength, muscle size, daily function and quality of life over the 
    year. Picture: Esme Allen
A Scots-led clinical trial is to examine whether a 
    commonly used heart pill and a food supplement could improve the 
    health of older people across the UK by improving muscle 
    strength.
Researchers at the University of Dundee, University of Aberdeen 
    and Imperial College London are testing whether the treatments can 
    prevent the weakening of muscles that commonly affects the 
    elderly.
The research team aims to recruit 450 people aged 70 and over 
    from across the UK.
Participants will be given a heart pill (perindopril) or a 
    matching dummy tablet, and also a food supplement powder (leucine) 
    or matching dummy powder.
All the participants will take part for a year, and the research 
    team will test how muscle strength, muscle size, daily function and 
    quality of life change over the year.
Dr Miles Witham, lead researcher for the study at the University 
    of Dundee said: “Muscle weakness, which we call sarcopenia, 
    is really common as we get older, and I see many patients in my 
    work as a geriatrician who are affected by this problem.
“Older people with weak muscles find it much harder to 
    get around, or to climb stairs, and are more prone to falling and 
    injuring themselves. In the long term, people with weaker muscles 
    are more likely to need help to look after themselves. So keeping 
    muscles working well is important in keeping older people active 
    and independent.
“Although we know exercise helps to improve muscle 
    strength even in very old people, it’s important to find new ways 
    to keep muscles working well in older people and to help improve 
    strength when muscles are weak.
“That’s why we are excited to be running this new trial. 
    Previous research has suggested that both perindopril and leucine 
    might improve muscle strength, and both these treatments have been 
    used safely in older people for many years.
“It is only by doing this big trial that we will really 
    know if these treatments are going to benefit older people 
    though.”
The £1.4 million trial, named Lace, is run by Tayside Clinical 
    Trials Unit and is funded by the Efficacy and Mechanism Evaluation 
    Programme, a Medical Research Council 
    andNational Institute for 
    Health Research partnership.
The research team are collaborating with doctors at 15 centres 
    across the UK, and results from the trial are expected in 2019.
Meanwhile, a new study suggests that eating more apples, 
    oranges, bananas, grapes and kale could help teenagers and young 
    women reduce the risk of breast cancer in later life.
The study, published in the British Medical Journal, found high 
    fruit consumption during adolescence was associated with a 25 per 
    cent lower risk of breast cancer diagnosed in middle age.
