 New hope for Honey Bees 
 The Varroa mite - a scourge on UK 
    Honeybee populations 
Scientists may be able to halt global honey bee losses 
    by forcing the deadly Varroa mite, lethal in freezing weather, to 
    self destruct.
The blood-sucking Varroa is the biggest killer of honey bees 
    world-wide, having developed resistance to beekeepers’ medication. 
    It is particularly destructive in winter as depleted colonies do 
    not have enough bees huddling together to keep warm.
Now researchers from the Government’s National Bee Unit and 
    Aberdeen University have worked out how to ‘silence’ natural 
    functions in the mites’ genes to make them self destruct.
Dr Alan Bowman from the University of Aberdeen, said: 
    “Introducing harmless genetic material encourages the mites’ 
    own immune response to prevent their genes from expressing natural 
    functions. This could make them self destruct.
“The beauty of this approach is that it is really 
    specific and targets the mites without harming the bees or, indeed, 
    any other animal.”
Dr Giles Budge, from National Bee Unit, part of the Food and 
    Environment Research Agency (Fera), added: “This cutting 
    edge treatment is environmentally-friendly and poses no threat to 
    the bees. “With appropriate support from industry and a rigorous 
    approval process, chemical-free medicines could be available in 
    five to ten years time.”
A little brown crab, the Varroa mite originally attacked the 
    Asian honeybee, but jumped to the European honeybee which has a 
    poor natural defence.
The mite injects viruses which suppress the bees’ immune system 
    and then feeds on the blood and if left untreated, it can take just 
    1,000 mites to kill a colony of 50,000 bees.
Honey bees are worth 
    £200million to the UK economy a year through pollinating 
    crops, but the Honey bee populations have dropped by 23 per cent 
    since 1992, potentially costing the economy millions of pounds.
Environment Minister Lord Henley said: “Bees are 
    essential to putting food on our table and worth £200million to 
    Britain every year. This excellent work by UK scientists will keep 
    our hives healthy and bees buzzing.”
The process uses the Nobel Prize-winning theory ‘RNA 
    interference’, which controls the flow of genetic information. So 
    far ‘silencing’ has worked with a neutral Varroa gene, which has no 
    significant effect on the mite. Scientists now need to target a 
    gene with the specific characteristics that are prefect to force 
    the Varroa to self destruct.
Tests by other scientists have show the treatment can be added 
    to hives in bee feed. The bees move it into food for their young, 
    where the Varroa hides.
Steve Robson, who helps run the family business at Chain Bridge 
    Honey Farm, near Berwick, said: “We have 1,500 hives all 
    over north Northumberland and in the Scottish borders. We lost 50 
    this spring to the Varroa mite, so this is very good 
    news.
“It is also very timely as they are particularly 
    destructive at the moment as the temperatures continue to plummet 
    and we have deep snow. There is nothing much you can do to 
    eradicate the mite, which proves to be very costly, and I am 
    certainly interested in finding out more.” 
