Highland bog reveals global warming threat to peatlands 
    
 Peatlands are vital to the survival of 
    many plants. 
Rising sea levels and increased pollution linked to 
    global warming are posing a huge threat to the future of the 
    world’s peatland areas, new research has concluded. 
Geologists based their findings on a major study of Kentra Moss, 
    in Lochaber, a blanket bog deemed a special conservation area. They 
    found climate change is increasing salt levels in peatlands which 
    makes it less able to store carbon.
Peat bogs cover 3 per cent of the Earth’s surface and play a 
    crucial role in absorbing and storing carbon from the 
    atmosphere.
Experts say that natural ecosystems are now under “considerable 
    threat” around the world – and significantly in Scotland, where 20 
    per cent of the land is covered in peat, storing 1.6 billion tonnes 
    of carbon.
Peatlands are also vital for providing natural filters for clean 
    water, sustaining plants and wildlife, and providing some rural 
    areas with fuel as well as the water used to give whisky its 
    distinctive taste and colour.
Study leader Dr Angela Gallego-Salas, senior lecturer in 
    physical geography at Exeter University, said: “The results 
    were startling. Peatland areas are vital for our ecosystems. We 
    need to act now to protect our peatlands. The effects of global 
    warming are already being observed, but the longer we wait to act, 
    the quicker changes to our environment, which would have a 
    devastating impact on many regions around the world, will take 
    place.”
Her team examined the impact salt found in seawater has on how 
    successfully peatland ecosystems accumulate carbon from the 
    atmosphere. They discovered that the rate at which peatland areas 
    accumulated carbon was significantly impacted as the concentration 
    of salt rose. 
The results – which appeared in the scientific journal 
    Scientific Reports – highlighted how sea levels 
    linked to predicted climate change pose a serious threat to the 
    future security of peatlands.
They found the levels would be high enough to inundate areas and 
    deposit more salt further inland. The samples showed that as salt 
    levels increased, the vegetation that colonise the bogs altered 
    significantly, resulting in a sharp fall in carbon storage. 
Gallego-Salas added: “Scotland is a peat-rich nation. 
    Peatlands are of great importance in terms of their ecological 
    value, their beauty and cultural value.”
She added: “Additionally, blanket bogs – like the 
    peatland at Kentra Bay – are globally rare, even if they are very 
    common in Scotland, so Scotland holds a lot of the global resource 
    of blanket bogs. The sad news is that they have been extensively 
    drained and damaged, 70 per cent of blanket bogs and 90 per cent of 
    raised bogs in Scotland have been damaged.”
She said peatlands are vital to wildlife, notably moorland 
    breeding birds and plants like insect-eating sundews. Animals such 
    as deer, eagles, mountain hares are also dependent on peatlands.
Scottish Natural Heritage (SNH) already has a National Peatland 
    Plan which aims to make the peatlands more sustainable and 
    encourage restoration and management of them.
Peat soils in Scotland contain almost 25 times as much carbon as 
    all other plant life in the UK, SNH said. 
