Scientists find 10 times more galaxies existing than 
    previously thought

If you find the immense size of the universe humbling, prepare 
    to feel even more insignificant.
Scientists have calculated that the observable universe contains 
    at least two trillion galaxies - 10 times more than previously 
    thought.
A British-led team of international astronomers came to the 
    conclusion after converting images from the Hubble Space Telescope 
    and observatories around the world into 3D maps.
These were used to calculate the density of galaxies as well as 
    the volume of separate small regions of space.
When the pieces of the cosmic jigsaw were put together, it 
    produced a surprise.
Until now, it had been thought that the observable universe - 
    the part of the cosmos we can see because light from distant 
    objects has had time to reach us - contained up to 200 billion 
    galaxies.
But the new study suggests that significantly more galaxies 
    existed during earlier epochs of the universe's history. When 
    it was only a few billion years old, 10 times more galaxies filled 
    a given volume of space than is the case today.
The total number of galaxies was expanded to an estimated two 
    trillion.
Lead scientist Professor Christopher Conselice, from the 
    University of Nottingham, said: "Finding more galaxies 
    in the past implies that significant evolution must have occurred 
    to reduce their number through extensive merging of 
    systems."
He added: "We are missing the vast majority of 
    galaxies because they are very faint and far away.
"The number of galaxies in the universe is a 
    fundamental question in astronomy, and it boggles the mind that 
    over 90% of the galaxies in the cosmos have yet to be 
    studied.
"Who knows what interesting properties we will find 
    when we study these galaxies with the next generation of 
    telescopes?"
The research, co-funded by the Royal Astronomical Society, 
    appears in the Astrophysical Journal.
