Scottish breast cancer drug discovery offers new treatment 
    hope 
 Scientists have identified a chemical 
    compound that is highly effective at blocking the growth of breast 
    cancer cells in the laboratory. 
A new breast cancer treatment which destroys tumours 
    more effectively than existing medicines could be on the horizon, 
    according to a “promising” study.
Edinburgh University scientists have pinpointed a chemical 
    compound called eCF506 that is highly effective at blocking the 
    growth of breast cancer cells in the laboratory.
The compound targets a molecule called Src tyrosine kinase, 
    which is vital for the growth and spread of breast cancer cells.
Drugs that target the same molecule are already being tested in 
    clinical trials but researchers claim this compound could be more 
    effective and produce fewer side effects as it is more selective in 
    the molecules it targets.
Dr Asier Unciti-Broceta, who led the study at the Cancer 
    Research UK Edinburgh Centre, said: “eCF506 is the first drug 
    candidate of a second generation of Src inhibitors that will not 
    only help to understand the complexity of some cancers but also the 
    development of safer combination therapies.”
More than 1,000 people die from breast cancer in Scotland every 
    year.
The team used a pioneering approach for the study where they 
    tested the candidate drug on human breast cancer cells, rather than 
    lab-created proteins, which allowed them to visualise the effects 
    of the drugs more efficiently.
It is hoped this technique could provide a quicker and cheaper 
    way of discovering new medicines.
Professor Neil Carragher, head of the Edinburgh Cancer Discovery 
    Unit, who co-led the study published in the Journal of Medicinal 
    Chemistry, said: “This candidate drug will need to undergo further 
    preclinical testing before it can be taken forward into clinical 
    trials but these early findings are very promising.
“This approach is also very exciting as the cancers are telling 
    us how to design the drugs.”
Mary Allison, Scotland Director of Breast Cancer Now, said: 
    “Targeting some proteins involved in cancer with drugs has 
    traditionally been a challenge, as these drugs might also have 
    unintended consequences on normal cells as well as cancer cells.
“New methods of drug design like this research might help 
    overcome some of these hurdles, so these early findings are a 
    positive step forward.” 
