Scots scientists examine why some brains age better than 
    others
 The study examined why some 
    people's brains age better than others.
Edinburgh scientists have decoded the genetic make-up of more 
    than one thousand people as part of a long-term study to examine 
    why some people’s brains age better than others.
The gene study involved researchers at the University of 
    Edinburgh sequencing the DNA of 1,300 people as part of a project 
    which has tracked the same individuals for decades.
 Prof Ian Deary University of 
    Edinburgh.
The development will enable in-depth analysis of the 
    participants’ genetic make-up, and may help identify the genetic 
    basis of why some people’s brains age better than others from the 
    same age range.
The Lothian Birth Cohorts, 
    comprise two groups of people born in 1921 and 1936, who were 
    tested on their mental abilities at age 11, originally as a way of 
    informing education policies.
Over the past 15 years, members of the cohort have been 
    regularly tested by researchers at the university’s centre for 
    cognitive ageing and cognitive epidemiology (CCACE).
Their follow-up mental examinations, blood tests and brain scans 
    have yielded valuable information on mental and physical ageing.
By linking this new genetic information with the cognitive 
    testing carried out over the past 15 years, researchers hope to 
    shed new light on the factors underlying healthy ageing.
When participants were first recruited to the Lothian Birth 
    Cohorts, each person’s genome would have cost US$100 million to 
    sequence. Today, the cost is around US$1000 (about £700).
The genetic sequencing was conducted at Edinburgh Genomics at 
    the university, one of the largest sequencing facilities in the UK. 
    It was funded by the Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research 
    Council (BBSRC).
Professor Ian Deary, director of CCACE, said “This 
    genetic data will prove invaluable for understanding why some 
    people’s brains and thinking skills age better than 
    others.
“The flip side of having such comprehensive genetic data 
    is that we will also understand better how the environment and 
    lifestyle choices can contribute to healthy ageing.”
Joel Fearnley, Edinburgh Genomics chief operating officer, said: 
    “This pioneering work has been made possible by our highly 
    skilled team and the Scottish Genomes Partnership’s investment in 
    equipment that enables rapid sequencing and delivery of high 
    quality data at a viable cost.”
Professor David Hume, director of the university’s Roslin 
    Institute, which houses the gene sequencing facility, said: 
    “This achievement builds upon many years of BBSRC support 
    for genomic research in Roslin, through the ARK Genomics National 
    Capacity Grant. Aside from the opportunities to gain new insights 
    in human genetics, the work opens the door to similar large-scale 
    initiatives in other species.
Professor Tim Aitman, co-chair of the Scottish Genome 
    Partnership and director of the university’s centre for genomic and 
    experimental medicine, said: “We are delighted with the 
    quality and volume of data coming out of the Edinburgh Genomics 
    facility.
This tremendous rate of genetic sequencing is a testament 
    to an incredible team effort which will accelerate our work towards 
    radically improving disease diagnosis and management of patients in 
    the Scottish NHS.”
The Lothian Cohorts are funded by Age UK and the Medical 
    Research Council.
