Animals who help other animals

Many animals show amazing courage to assist each other 
    when danger’s about.
Cats, with just three known blood types, can supply blood for 
    each other after illness or an accident, as can horses, pigs and 
    others, including dogs. There’s even a thing called xenocraft, in 
    which different types of animal have successfully given blood to 
    one another.
However, it’s when monkeys fight off dogs to save their babies, 
    or make friends with dogs, that you start to appreciate how our 
    world’s creatures stick together. Maybe, in fact, we humans could 
    learn a few lessons from them!
When a tiger cub was born at a zoo in Germany and rejected by 
    his mother, a kind-hearted Dachshund called Monster took the little 
    one under her wing, so to speak. Monster’s daughter Bessi and the 
    cub have become close pals, after Monster suddenly passed away.
It was cougar cubs who needed canine help when they were born at 
    another zoo, in Samara, Russia. Staff were worried the parents 
    would prove a bit too rough, so German shepherd Cholli took on 
    motherly duties! Since then, she’s cared for them and reared them 
    into cheeky little cougars, and they shower her with love in 
    return.
Workers who found orphaned bobcats at a demolished property in 
    South Carolina, USA, asked if it would be possible for an ordinary 
    domestic feline to foster them, and Zoe stepped up to do just that. 
    With her maternal expertise, the little furballs won’t grow up as 
    wild as they might have, but they’ll become adults with a mom who 
    cherishes them.
In San Francisco, a six-year-old Labrador by the name of Koa 
    found rabbit orphans to look after all by herself. Her owners were 
    astonished, especially as the do-good dog had never had puppies of 
    her own! Nevertheless, her motherly instinct saw her automatically 
    feed and rear the tiny bunnies.
Surely one of the most astonishing acts of inter-animal kindness 
    is between dog Rex and a baby kangaroo. The little joey was thrown 
    from his mother’s pouch as she was killed after being struck by a 
    car, but the wire terrier saved him, kept him warm and has since 
    bonded with the beautiful little critter.
A hippo made an unlikely Good Samaritan when a young zebra got 
    caught in the lethal currents of a Tanzania river and looked likely 
    to be swept to its death. The big guy stepped in and nosed the 
    creature to safety, and even went back to save a wildebeest — 
    surely this is proof it isn’t all about survival of the fittest in 
    the animal kingdom?
We’ve long known how wonderful dolphins are, not least when 
    interacting with us lot. But Moko, a bottlenose from New Zealand, 
    made his human pals applaud when he saved a whale and her calf, who 
    had got caught on a sandbank. He does, however, misbehave, too, and 
    often pinches their surfboards and other gear, just to make the 
    humans chase him!
Chimp Anjana has well and truly fallen for a little white tiger, 
    taking care of all her needs, while Koko the gorilla loves her 
    kittens.
Alas, not all animals are so keen to help each other — in 
    Connecticut, coyotes are becoming a real problem, and one brave dog 
    chased them off after they pursued a terrified cat.
Believe it or not, in Rhode Island, it was a cat who saved the 
    dog from a coyote attack.
When Lilly, a little pug, was cornered by the ferocious 
    creatures, it was a local cat who alerted her family to the brawl, 
    and they chased off the coyotes just in time.
