Enzyme breakthrough offers new hope against pneumonia and 
    meningitis
 Scientists believe their research into 
    a key enzyme could accelerate the development of new antibiotics to 
    fight infections such as pneumonia and meningitis
A BREAKTHROUGH by bacteriologists in Scotland is paving the way 
    to new treatments for killer respiratory infections such as 
    pneumonia.
Scientists from St Andrews University and Oxfordshire-based 
    Diamond Light Source have unravelled the structure of a key enzyme 
    in Streptococcus pneumoniae, the bacteria responsible for 
    infections including pneumonia, meningitis, and septicaemia.
The findings are published in the Journal of Biological 
    Chemistry.
Respiratory infections are one of the biggest killers in the 
    western world, particularly among children and the elderly.
Researchers used intense beams of light to uncover the structure 
    of NanC, a type of enzyme known as a neuraminidase. Streptococcus 
    pneumoniae bacteria contain up to three neuraminidase enzymes: Nan 
    A, B and C.
The scientists had already uncovered the structure of the other 
    two neuraminidases – A and B. The discovery of the NanC structure 
    is the final step in identifying how these enzymes work to sustain 
    S. pneumoniae, and how they could be targeted and disabled to 
    destroy the bacteria.
Martin Walsh, deputy life sciences director at Diamond and lead 
    author on the study, said:
“With the structure of NanC, we now have a vital new 
    piece of the puzzle which informs wider research into drug design 
    and equips us to better tackle the pneumococcus in all its 
    forms."
Garry Taylor, Professor of Molecular Biophysics and Deputy 
    Principal of St Andrews University, said: “With a fuller 
    understanding of the structure and function of S. pnemoniae’s three 
    neuraminidase enzymes, we’re now better equipped to design 
    next-generation antibiotics for some of the world’s most prevalent 
    and deadly respiratory infections.”
