Unique vocal organ enabling birds to sing 'developed 
    66 million years ago'

Birds developed the unique vocal organ that enables them to sing 
    more than 66 million years ago when dinosaurs walked the Earth, a 
    new fossil discovery has shown.
But the earliest syrinx, an arrangement of vibrating cartilage 
    rings at the base of the windpipe, was still a long way from 
    producing the lilting notes of a song thrush or blackbird.
Scientists believe the extinct duck and goose relative that 
    possessed the organ was only capable of making honking noises.
The bird, Vegavis iaai, lived during the Cretaceous era. 
    Although its fossil bones were unearthed from Vega Island in 
    Antarctica in 1992, it was not until three years ago that experts 
    spotted the syrinx.
All birds living today are descended from a particular family of 
    dinosaurs that developed feathers and the ability to fly.
The new discovery suggests the syrinx is another hallmark of 
    birds that was absent from non-avian dinosaurs.
Dr Julia Clarke, from the University of Texas at Austin, US, who 
    led a study of the fossil syrinx published in the journal Nature, 
    said: "This finding helps explain why no such organ has 
    been preserved in a non-bird dinosaur or crocodile 
    relative.
"This is another important step to figuring out what 
    dinosaurs sounded like as well as giving us insight into the 
    evolution of birds."
Unlike the human voice box, or larynx, the syrinx does not 
    employ vocal cords but instead consists of stiff, cartilage rings 
    that vibrate to produce sound.
Cartilage does not mineralise as well as bone, making it rare in 
    the fossil record.
So far the Vegavis syrinx remains the only one known to 
    scientists from the age of the dinosaurs.
The researchers are now comparing the organ with its equivalent 
    in living birds in search of clues about how the earliest birds may 
    have sounded.
"The origin of birds is about so much more than the 
    evolution of flight and feathers," Dr Clarke said.
She led a previous study reported earlier this year showing that 
    some dinosaurs would probably have made closed-mouth noises similar 
    to ostrich "booms", that do not require a syrinx.
