Snails can make complex decisions ‘with only two brain 
    cells’ 

Snails are not known for their quick thinking but can 
    make complex decisions using just two brain cells, scientists have 
    learned.
One cell tells the mollusc if it is hungry or not while the 
    other lets it know when food is present.
The discovery, made using electrodes to measure activity in the 
    brains of freshwater snails searching for lettuce, could help 
    engineers design more efficient robots.
Lead researcher Professor George Kemenes, from the University of 
    Sussex, said: “What goes on in our brains when we make 
    complex behavioural decisions and carry them out is poorly 
    understood.
“Our study reveals for the first time how just two 
    neurons can create a mechanism in an animal’s brain which drives 
    and optimises complex decision-making tasks.
“It also shows how this system helps to manage how much 
    energy they use once they have made a decision.
“Our findings can help scientists to identify other core 
    neuronal systems which underlie similar decision-making 
    processes.
“This will eventually help us design the ‘brains’ of 
    robots based on the principle of using the fewest possible 
    components necessary to perform complex tasks.”
In order to test the snail’s decision-making, the researchers 
    hooked up electrodes to monitor changes in activity in its brain, 
    which picked up on spikes in the activity of individual neurons.
They found that the two cells – a controller and a motivator – 
    fed back to each other to make the decision. If food is present, 
    the controller lets the animal know, and if the motivator says it 
    is hungry, then the snail will nibble away.
But if food is not present, then the circuit can dial itself 
    down, saving energy.
Seeking out food is a fundamental survival skill for animals and 
    an example of goal-directed behaviour.
During such goal-directed decision making, an animal must 
    integrate information about both its external environment and 
    internal state while using as little energy as possible.
Professor Kemenes said: ‘Our findings can help scientists 
    to identify other core neuronal systems which underlie similar 
    decision making processes.
“This will eventually help us design the ‘brains’ of 
    robots based on the principle of using the fewest possible 
    components necessary to perform complex tasks.”
The study is published in the journal Nature Communications.
