Scotland holds key to earliest land walking life 
 How the earliest land walking animals 
    looked.
360 million year old fossils found in Berwickshire 
    could be the earliest examples of animals to have walked on 
    land. 
In 2011, self-taught paleontologist the late Stan Wood 
    discovered a series of rare fossils at a location named Willie’s 
    Hole near the village of Chirnside in Berwickshire. 
Wood’s fossils belonged to an early group of animals known as 
    tetrapods - the first four-legged vertebrates on Earth. 
Just six months after his discovery, Wood, from Selkirk, who 
    found what may be the world’s earliest reptile in a limestone 
    quarry in West ­Lothian in 1984, died of cancer at the age of 72. 
    
Last year, National Museums of Scotland and University Museum of 
    Zoology Cambridge sent teams of excavators and researchers back to 
    Chirnside to continue Stan Wood’s work. 
In their study, Jennifer Clack and colleagues from Cambridge 
    University describe five new and diverse species which date back 
    approximately 360 million years - just before the time of the 
    Devonian Period mass extinction. 
The Chirnside fossils help to fill a 25 million year gap in the 
    tetrapod fossil record, covering a key time in their evolution of 
    which relatively little is known. 
The team identified two of the species as early amphibians, and 
    three as more distantly related early tetrapods, which suggests an 
    early split between amphibians and amniotes (reptiles, birds and 
    mammals). 
Tetrapods from the late Devonian period, before the mass 
    extinction, were fish-like with many digits. The fossils from after 
    the period known as Romer’s Gap have fewer digits and more closely 
    resemble today’s land vertebrates. 
The reason for the apparent gap in the fossil record is not 
    known, but it has been suggested that low oxygen levels limited the 
    number and diversity of tetrapods. 
Scotland has a long-standing track record of turning up some of 
    the best pre-dinosaur archaeology sites on Earth. 
One of the most famous was found in Dunbartonshire in 1971, when 
    a specimen named Pederpes finneyae was unearthed from limestone 
    deposits. 
And in 2004, an ancient millipede fossil dating back 428 million 
    years was dug up in Stonehaven. 
Fragments of tetrapod fossils dating from the same era have been 
    found elsewhere around the world, such as the USA, Canada and 
    Australia, but the Berwickshire fossils represent some of the best 
    preserved examples yet to be discovered. 
