Feathered migrants staying longer
Willow Warbler on Fair Isle.
Migrating birds such as swallows and house martins are 
    increasingly reluctant to leave the UK and return to Africa, 
    apparently taking advantage of longer and warmer summers in Europe, 
    new research has found.
They may even be nesting more often.
The study in the international science journal, Global Change 
    Biology, says migrant birds that arrive at their breeding grounds 
    early in spring might be expected to depart early in autumn too, as 
    soon as their chicks have fledged. But in consecutive seasons that 
    didn't happen.
The research used daily observations of migrant birds from the 
    remote Fair Isle Bird Observatory, between Orkney and Shetland
     , to measure how spring and 
    autumn migration timing has changed over 60 years.
Dr Will Miles, of the Fair Isle Migration Project says, 
    “Environmental conditions are changing rapidly at a global 
    scale. In response to these changes, the seasonal life-cycles of 
    plants and animals are shifting too, often in dramatic and 
    unexpected ways.
"It’s too early to know for sure exactly why bird 
    migrations now last so much longer in spring and autumn, but it’s 
    possible that conditions in Europe and Africa have gradually become 
    more favourable for long-distance migration, and the birds are now 
    under less pressure to migrate quickly within a short time 
    window."
He said that for example on Fair Isle, Swallows and House 
    Martins were migrating up to a fortnight later than they did a few 
    decades ago. Willow Warblers used to migrate within a five week 
    period in spring but now this species is seen on migration for up 
    to 10 weeks.
"Some species appear to be staying in Europe for 
    longer in the summer and may breed several times, and that is an 
    advantage for the birds,” he said.
He added this latest test analyses demonstrated that long-term 
    changes in migration timing can be more complex than widely 
    assumed.
The Fair Isle Migration Project is a scientific collaboration 
    between the Fair Isle Bird Observatory Trust and the University of 
    Aberdeen.
