Turbines are threat to birds on migration, study 
    finds
  
BIRDS of prey are at serious risk of crashing into offshore 
    turbines as they migrate over open water, according to new 
    research.
Scientists have discovered that unlike seabirds, which tend to 
    avoid offshore structures, raptors such as hen harriers are 
    attracted to the turbines by an “island effect”.
The study suggests that this may be because the birds are 
    reluctant to cross open water and look for help while trying to 
    navigate.
The findings come after it was announced last month that work is 
    under way to construct parts for the £2.6 billion Beatrice Offshore 
    Windfarm Limited (Bowl) project, in the Moray Firth.
A turbine’s blade can reach a height of 220m (752ft) which is 
    around the same altitude at which the birds of prey fly over 
    water.
Researchers at Aarhus University, Denmark, led by Henrik Skov, 
    set up two bird finding radars and a laser rangefinder on a narrow 
    strait on the Baltic Sea off the north coast of Germany during the 
    autumn migration.
One of the radars was placed next to Nysted wind farm and the 
    other placed further up the Danish west coast.
After watching the birds migration route, scientists spotted a 
    large number of sparrowhawks, kites, harriers, buzzards and falcons 
    flying through the sound.
The researchers found the the birds were deliberately making a 
    beeline for the turbines and flying away from their normal route 
    out of Scandinavia.
According to the study, the birds became more attracted to the 
    structures as the head winds increased.
Writing in the Royal Society journal Biology Letters, the 
    scientists suggested that the animals were trying seek shelter for 
    bad weather. They said: “Birds are attracted to offshore 
    structures for various reasons.“However, An ‘island effect’ similar 
    to the process which causes attraction of land-bird species to 
    small islands is perhaps the most likely driver behind the 
    attraction behaviour.”
A spokesman for the RSPB responded to the new findings: 
    “While we need to generate more electricity through 
    renewable sources, this must be delivered in harmony with 
    nature. “
