Scots in cities most likely to fall victim to lung 
    disease
 A person dies of lung disease in the UK 
    every five minutes. Picture: PA
Scots living in urban areas are more likely to die 
    from lung disease than anywhere else in the UK, a new report 
    said.
The impact of heavy industry and a higher than 
    averagerate of smoking is 
    blamed for mortality rates from the condition being almost three 
    times higher in central Glasgow than in parts of London.
The figures were revealed in the first major audit in a decade 
    of treatment for lung conditions. Research by the British Lung 
    Foundation revealed breathing-related illness are far more 
    widespread than previously thought. One person dies and five more 
    are diagnosed with lung disease every five minutes, with only heart 
    disease and cancer affecting more people in the UK.
Scotland was found to have higher rates of less common lung 
    conditions such as pneumoconiosis, commonly caused by inhaling 
    dusts and chemicals in the workplace.
Various parts of the country, particularly those with a history 
    of shipbuilding such as Glasgow, also have high rates of the 
    asbestos-related cancer mesothelioma. Scots were also found to be 
    more likely than the UK average to suffer from conditions such as 
    asthma, sarcoidosis and idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. The 
    foundation said the NHS was guilty of “systemic 
    neglect” of those living with lung disease, as survival 
    rates have barely changed in ten years.
Irene Johnstone, head of British Lung Foundation Scotland, said: 
    “Although a lot of lung disease in Scotland can be 
    attributed to our historically higher rates of smoking, there are 
    still thousands dying each year from lung conditions not caused by 
    tobacco. Therefore, while current government efforts to tackle 
    smoking are absolutely to be welcomed, any effective strategy to 
    reduce lung disease deaths in Scotland needs to be far more 
    wide-reaching.
“This is why we need a national improvement plan for lung 
    health in Scotland.”
