 Advancing technology best way to protect nature 
 There is still room for nature in 
    today's world arguably more room as land use has changed 
    hugely. In the UK in 1850, 50 per cent of the population lived on 
    the land, today that figure is 2 per cent. 
An Ecomodernist manifesto has recently been published by 18 
    prominent greens. Its 84 statements are a radical departure from 
    traditional environmentalism which it rejects. Humanity it states 
    must shrink its environmental impacts to provide more space for 
    nature.
This view is incompatible with traditional environmentalist 
    policy of accommodating mankind within the natural world. Nature 
    will not be protected by increasing human dependence upon it more 
    so because the human population is expected to increase not 
    decrease. Ecomodernists most radical departure is to embrace 
    technology; by intensifying agriculture, energy extraction and 
    generation, forestry and human settlement, land use is diminished 
    and natural space increased. The way is opened for recovery of 
    planetary ecosystems on which formerly mankind was heavily 
    dependent; and in certain parts of the world still is. It will 
    decouple humankind from the natural world ensuring its survival.
Traditional environmentalist agitation is usually based on the 
    invalid claim that only their programme will “save the planet”. 
    Technology, commerce, consumption and energy are usually targeted 
    as the villains amid claims that these present human activities 
    will wreak ecological and economic collapse. Environmentalists 
    favour some return to a condition (often not clearly defined) in 
    which it is supposed mankind lived equitably and in harmony with 
    the natural world. However this “desirable” state only ever existed 
    in the remote past when human numbers were tiny and relative land 
    space enormous. Even small numbers of humans are thought to have 
    disposed of the mammoth and other, now extinct, mammals, 20-30,000 
    years ago. Reducing present humanity to unspecified 
    hunter-gatherers or subsistence farmer status would certainly 
    create the disaster which their policy is supposed to avoid.
That mankind has damaged numerous world ecosystems is certainly 
    obvious but as technology has developed it has increasingly removed 
    human impact upon them. Technology is thus not the villain but 
    intensifying its efficiency is the obvious direction in which 
    decoupling will accelerate, the manifesto states. Evident damage to 
    marine fish stocks is exemplified by the loss of the massive 
    herring populations of the North Sea and complete loss of cod off 
    the Newfoundland coast. The intensification of aquaculture for 
    marine as well as fresh fish will demonstratably reduce human 
    impact on the oceans. Three-quarters of deforestation took place 
    before the industrial revolution. Desertification in parts of 
    Africa has resulted from trees cut down to provide cooking fuel or 
    charcoal production. Reforestation is however now increasing in 
    various parts of the world as electricity and natural gas have 
    replaced wood for cooking and heating, in most developing and 
    developed countries. Both whales and penguins were hunted almost to 
    extinction for oil to illuminate houses but were saved by the 
    introduction initially of coal gas and now electricity. Killer fogs 
    and pollution from coal use in large cities such as London has now 
    been replaced by natural gas central heating.
Desalination is the key to dwindling water supplies in many 
    world areas. Technological development will render unnecessary, 
    vast storage facilities where rainfall is highly variable. The 
    intensification of energy generation has seen a progression from 
    wood to coal to oil to natural gas and thence to nuclear energy 
    which the manifesto embraces. There is a progression towards the 
    use of more energy dense materials but also towards effective 
    decarbonisation thus indicating future policy direction. Thorium in 
    reactors can allay virtually all public concern over weapons 
    proliferation, radioactive pollution, toxic waste and fuel that is 
    costly and complicated to process. One tonne of thorium can produce 
    as much energy as two to three million tonnes of coal. Very cheap 
    reliable electricity is key to accelerating technological 
    development and land sparing.
Urbanisation is the ultimate means of decoupling mankind from 
    nature. Currently over half of mankind, four billion, now live in 
    cities, places of usually low fertility but whose area is at best 
    1-3 per cent of the planetary land surface. By 2100, 70-80 per cent 
    are likely to be urban. Suburbanisation, low yielding farming, 
    renewable energy generation and other land hungry activities 
    favoured by current environmentalists decrease space for nature. 
    But it is agricultural intensification that has invoked the primary 
    change in land use. In the UK in 1850, 50 per cent of the 
    population lived on the land, now it is 2 per cent but wheat 
    yields/acre have increased 15-fold.
For undeveloped and developing countries, intensifying 
    agriculture will help decouple humanity and nature; low yielding 
    agriculture will not suffice. GM technology can now generate crops 
    specific to single species of damaging insects thus obviating 
    chemical pesticide treatments and permitting proliferation of those 
    more beneficial. Ecomodernisation is the progressive evolution of 
    social, economic, political and technological development. Material 
    well-being, health, infrastructure and personal freedom have all 
    advanced. It has liberated women from chattel status, children and 
    ethnic minorities from oppression and capricious government but 
    requires a continuing commitment to technological development. 
