Apes remembering voices from their past
 
Most of us will never forget the voices of our oldest friends, 
    but apparently such recall is not unique to humans as our closest 
    living relative in the animal kingdom can do the same.
Indeed the bonobo ape, can remember the voices of old friends 
    for several years, scientists have shown.
An international research team from the universities of St 
    Andrews and Saint-Etienne in France, made the discovery after 
    recording the calls of individual bonobos and playing them to those 
    they had known years before.
When it was a familiar voice in the recording, the bonobos 
    became excited and would search for the individual, while the 
    animals gave little reaction to hearing the calls of bonobos they 
    had never known.
The team concluded that the primates are therefore capable of 
    remembering the voice of a former group member, even after five 
    years of separation.
Sumir Keenan, of the School of Psychology and Neuroscience at 
    the University of St Andrews, said: “Members of a bonobo 
    community separate regularly into small groups for hours or even 
    days and often use loud calls to communicate with one another. 
    Moreover, females leave their original community but may continue 
    to interact with their old companions in subsequent meetings 
    between communities. So, effective social navigation depends on the 
    ability to recognise social partners past and present.
“It is fascinating to discover that this knowledge of 
    familiar voices in the long term is another characteristic we share 
    with our closest relatives.”
The researchers were able to use recordings of bonobos from zoos 
    across Europe, taking advantage of the fact that some bonobos had 
    experienced several zoos and had formed links past and present with 
    members of their species in different places.
Mimicking the events characteristic of the arrival of a new 
    bonobo, the scientists played the recorded bonobo calls using 
    carefully hidden speakers.
Ms Keenan said Bonobos, like many other primate species, 
    including human beings, formed complex social networks where 
    remembering “who is who” is important, sometimes 
    vital. These social associations needed recognition between members 
    of the groups – usually via faces and voices. Human beings are 
    experts when it comes to recognising the voices of those closest to 
    them and can recognise a voice many years after last hearing it.
The last common ancestors of bonobos, chimpanzees and humans 
    lived six to eight million years ago and shared numerous 
    characteristics such as behaviours and genes.
In the natural environment, bonobos live in Equatorial forest in 
    the centre of Africa, where they live in large communities with 
    complex social networks.
