Sea shrub could hold the key to tackling obesity
  Sea shrub could hold the key to 
    tackling obesity
A SPIKY seaside shrub is being tested by scientists who believe 
    its sap could provide a cure for obesity.
Sea Buckthorn, long used in India as a health supplement, also 
    grows around the Scottish coast. Scientists at the Rowett Institute 
    of Nutrition and Health at Aberdeen University believe the harsh 
    weather could concentrate levels of so-called 
    “phytochemicals” in the plants as they work hard to 
    survive.
Phytochemicals are known to boost the energy created by the body 
    to digest food, leading to a hope that the hardy perennial could 
    prove to be a natural weapon in weight management.
Sea Buckthorn is a spiky, deciduous shrub which bears bright 
    orange berries. It is particularly common on the north-east coast, 
    around sand dunes.
Scottish wild garlic and berries are also being tested by the 
    team at the Rowett Institute for their effectiveness in speeding up 
    metabolism and burning fat.
Dr Viren Ranawana, of the Institute’s life-long health team, 
    said that while foods such as chilli, mustard and horseradish were 
    known to increase metabolism, the usefulness of Scotland’s native 
    plants had been ignored until now.
He said: “The traditional approach to weight management 
    is to reduce food intake and increase energy expenditure and 
    although this method works, it does not seem to be sustainable 
    given the rise in obesity in Scotland and indeed around the 
    world.
“What we are trying to do is look at different ways of 
    tackling the issue.” 
Wild garlic has also been well regarded for its medicinal 
    properties, and is found in many areas in Scotland.
Dr Ranawana will use a mixture of raspberries, brambles and 
    blueberries, as well as Sea Buckthorn, for the study. Seven 
    volunteers will be invited to have breakfast at the Rowett 
    Institute on four occasions.
After the breakfast, each volunteer will lie down for around 
    five hours as metabolic readings are taken, measuring carbon 
    dioxide levels in the breath which are proportional to how much 
    energy the body is using.
