Scientists finally unlock mystery ofwhy dinosaurs died – 
    really bad luck
Dinosaurs could be roaming the Earth today instead of 
    humans if they had not fallen victim to “colossal bad luck”, 
    according to new research led by Scottish scientists.
An international team of palaeontologists used the latest fossil 
    records and analytical methods to reconstruct events leading to the 
    demise of the prehistoric creatures around 66 million years ago.
Their research revealed the planet was experiencing major 
    environmental upheaval during the few million years before a 
    10km-wide asteroid struck in what is now Mexico. This included 
    extensive volcanic activity, fluctuating sea levels and dramatic 
    temperature swings.
At this time, the dinosaurs’ food chain was weakened by a lack 
    of diversity among the large plant-eaters on which carnivores 
    preyed, which is thought to have been caused by changes in the 
    climate and environment.
This created conditions that left dinosaurs ill-equipped to 
    survive the aftermath of the enormous asteroid strike.
The impact, which left a 150km-wide crater in the Yucatan 
    peninsula, would have caused tsunamis, earthquakes, wildfires, 
    see-sawing temperatures and other environmental changes.
The resulting collapse in food chains would have caused the 
    dinosaur kingdom to be wiped out, one species after another.
The only animals to survive were those that could fly, and these 
    evolved to become the birds of today.
The researchers suggest dinosaurs would likely have survived the 
    catastrophe if the asteroid had hit earth a few million years 
    earlier, when the range of species was more diverse and food chains 
    more robust, or later, when new species had evolved.
“The dinosaurs were victims of colossal bad 
    luck,” said geoscientist Dr Steve Brusatte, of the 
    University of Edinburgh, a lead researcher on the study.
“Not only did a giant asteroid strike, but it happened at 
    the worst possible time, when their ecosystems were 
    vulnerable.
“Our new findings help clarify one of the enduring 
    mysteries of science.”
Co-researcher Dr Richard Butler, of the University of 
    Birmingham’s school of geography, earth and environmental sciences, 
    said: “There has long been intense scientific debate about 
    the cause of the dinosaur extinction.
“Although our research suggests that dinosaur communities 
    were particularly vulnerable at the time the asteroid hit, there is 
    nothing to suggest that dinosaurs were doomed to extinction. 
    Without that asteroid, the dinosaurs would probably still be here, 
    and we very probably would not.”
The palaeontologists studied an updated catalogue of dinosaur 
    fossils, mostly unearthed in North America, to create a picture of 
    how dinosaurs changed over the few million years before the 
    asteroid hit.
They hope that studies in Spain and China will widen the 
    understanding of events.
Dinosaurs were a diverse group of animals that first appeared 
    during the Triassic period, 230 million years ago. They were the 
    dominant terrestrial vertebrates for 135 million years, from the 
    beginning of the Jurassic period, about 200 million years ago, 
    until the end of the Cretaceous period.
Fossil records indicate birds evolved from theropod dinosaurs 
    during the Jurassic age and so are considered a subgroup of 
    dinosaurs by many experts.
The study, supported by the European Commission and the US 
    National Science Foundation, was led by the Universities of 
    Edinburgh and Birmingham, in collaboration with the University of 
    Oxford, Imperial College London, Baylor University and University 
    College London.
