The drug-induced Edinburgh dinner parties that 
    revolutionised medicine 
 The effects of liquid chloroform on 
    Simpson and his friends.
Sir James Simpson changed the course of anaesthesia 
    after dishing out liquid chloroform - and other then experimental 
    drugs - to dinner guests at his Edinburgh town house.
A fascinating insight into Sir James’ work by his daughter Eve 
    Blantyre Simpson sheds light on the supper gatherings - first at 
    his flat at Dean Terrace and then at 52 Queen Street - and the 
    batch of narcotics that were on the menu.
 Dr James Y Simpson (1811-1870)
Sir James had become fixated on finding a way to the ease of 
    pain of surgery after being traumatised by the experience of one 
    female patient during his time at Edinburgh University medical 
    school.
After briefly leaving medical school to take up law, he returned 
    to medicine “devoted...to mitigate in some manner the 
    dreadful agonies which were endured within the grim walls of the 
    Royal Infirmary.”
It was his experiment with chloroform on November 4 1847 that 
    was to directly lead to the liquid being inhaled in the operating 
    theatre for the first time just two weeks later.
In her biography of her father, Eve Simpson recounts the early 
    experiments amid a time “of great interest in Dean Terrace” where 
    her father would fill his home with guests, eat luncheon, and 
    “every evening have an anaesthetic seance.” 
She added: “In company with Dr George Keith and Dr 
    Mathews Duncan he there tried various compounds of a narcotic 
    nature with a boldness not to be daunted that the experiments might 
    cross the boundary of unconsciousness never to return.” 
Tumblers, finger-glasses and saucers were among items 
    distributed to participants with a teaspoon of substance placed in 
    the vessel and warmed in hot water.
The “operators” would hold their mouth and nostrils over the 
    vessel, with slow and deliberate inhalation to follow.
On one occasion, chloric ether in fizzy water “that 
    looked like Champagne” was taken by a servant and given to 
    a cook, who “after drinking it, hastily fell 
    down.”
A Professor Miller, in his account of the gatherings, told how 
    he would return to the scene of the experiments at breakfast time 
    the next morning to check that no one who had taken part had 
    died.
It was Prof Miller who also gave a first-hand account of the 
    November 4 experiment when the group took chloroform together for 
    the first time. It has been argued that Sir James had earlier tried 
    the drug alone in a vivisection lab.
Prof Miller recalled how, on the night, the group had inhaled 
    several substances without much effect before it occurred to Sir 
    James to try an “ponderous material which he had earlier set 
    aside.”
He found the chloroform “from beneath a heap of waste paper” 
    with tumblers charged.
The account said: “Immediately, an unwonted (sic) 
    hilarity seized the party; they became bright eyed, very happy and 
    very loquacious, expatiating on the delicious aroma of the new 
    fluid.
“The conversation was of unusual intelligence, and quite 
    charmed the listeners.
“But suddenly there was a talk of sounds being heard like 
    those of a cotton mill, louder and louder; a moment more, than all 
    was quiet, and then a crash.”
“On awakening, Dr Simpson’s first perception was 
    mental.’This is far stronger and better than ether’ said he 
    to himself.
“His second was to note that he was prostrate on the 
    floor and that among the friends about him there was both confusion 
    and alarm.”
It was noted that Dr Duncan’s jaw had dropped, his eyes were 
    staring and that he was snoring in the “most determined and 
    alarming manner”.
On December 3 1847, Sir James, in a letter to his daughter, 
    wrote of the “odd occasion” of what he said was the first 
    chloroform experiment.
He said: “Before sitting down to supper we all inhaled 
    the fluid and “were under the mahogany in a 
    trice.”
While chloroform had already been found in America and used in 
    France and Germany, Dr Simpson is credited with discovering its 
    anaesthetic properties through inhalation.
On November 15 1847, chloroform was used for the first time in 
    surgery, with the assembled medica, including Professor Miller and 
    Dr Duncan, “rejoicing” in the physiological effects of the 
    substance.
Sir James, who graduated from Edinburgh University in 1832 and 
    who later became Professor of Medicine and Midwifery at the age of 
    28, was appointed physician to Queen Victoria in Scotland the year 
    of the great chloroform experiment.
Three years later was invited to become a member of the staff of 
    the Edinburgh Royal Infirmary, a rare honour for an obstetrician at 
    that time.
He was awarded the Order of St Olaf by the King of Sweden, the 
    Monthyon prize of the French Academy of Medicine, and honorary 
    doctorates by Oxford and Dublin.
Academies and medical societies from all over the world honoured 
    him. In 1866 he was created a baronet, the first received by a 
    doctor practicing in Scotland, and in 1869 he was granted the 
    Freedom of the City of Edinburgh. 
