Future health of Scottish whisky is in the genes
LOVERS of a wee dram may soon be raising a glass to 
    cutting-edge DNA fingerprinting techniques being used create a 
    Scottish “superbarley”.
Scientists at the forefront of barley crop genetics are using 
    the sort of profiling methods associated with criminal 
    investigations in a bid to ensure the long-term sustainability of 
    whisky’s raw material and increase production of the national 
    drink.
If successful, the £2 million Impromalt project, which is being 
    led by agriculture researchers at the James Hutton Institute in 
    Aberdeen, could be the single biggest breakthrough in barley 
    genetics since a new variety was developed in the 1960s.
Two crops of malting barley are sown each year north of the 
    Border – spring and winter. All whisky is currently made from the 
    spring crop due to its superior quality, which allows the maximum 
    amount of spirit to be produced. However, crops grown over winter 
    have a much higher yield and are more robust.
Supplies of malting barley have been hit by seasonal problems in 
    many parts of Europe and the UK, with drought and wet conditions in 
    2011 and 2012 seriously affecting quality. Predicted global warming 
    scenarios suggest weather fluctuations will become more frequent 
    and have the most drastic impact on the spring crop. Winter barley 
    can escape the worst effects of summer drought or a late harvest 
    because of its earlier maturity.
The aim of the five-year study is to identify the genes 
    responsible for spring barley’s valuable attributes and breed them 
    into hardy winter crops. This will help guarantee barley supplies 
    for malting and boost production of Scotland’s liquid gold.
“This project is about the future more than what’s 
    happening today,” said Dr James Brosnan, research manager 
    at the Scotch Whisky Research Institute and chair of the project 
    steering group.
“We now use more barley grown in Scotland than at any 
    other time. The challenge is for future years. We harvest spring 
    barley in a fairly narrow time window, and if the weather or other 
    growing factors close in to vastly impact on the crop, the 
    challenge would be in procuring the amount needed in an expanding 
    industry. We expect to be using more barley in the future due to 
    Scotch whisky’s continued success around the world.”
“This is not a genetic modification,” stressed 
    the institute’s Dr Bill Thomas, principal investigator in the 
    project.
“It’s being done through conventional breeding techniques 
    but using DNA fingerprinting to identify the regions we want to 
    mobilise from spring barley and put into a winter barley 
    background. Then we select the progeny in future 
    generations.
“Technically it’s no different from criminal DNA 
    profiling, except our criminals are lots of different 
    barleys.”
Around 40 per cent of all barley grown in Scotland is for the 
    whisky sector. As well as making high-quality malting barley 
    hardier, the project will deepen understanding of the chromosomal 
    make-up of the grain to help growers around the country.
“We’ll identify what it is that creates malting quality 
    at a genetic level and how the genes of the barley will react with 
    the environment. It’s just like DNA fingerprinting,” said 
    Brosnan.
“At the moment if a breeder wanted to make a successful 
    malting barley, they would do better to buy a lottery ticket – 
    you’re looking at probabilities of two million to one when you’re 
    making crosses.
“What this work is trying to do is help win the jackpot. 
    But instead of six balls, you will only have to pick 
    three.”
Thomas added: “Whilst plant breeders have previously 
    tried to add spring quality attributes into winter barley, they 
    have relied on chance events to assemble the right genes, which is 
    like searching for a needle in a haystack when the crops differ at 
    thousands of genetic loci.
“But we now have the knowledge and tools to introduce 
    spring attributes into winter barley in a highly targeted manner to 
    test the hypothesis that this will improve winter malting 
    quality.”
The latest figures from the Scotch Whisky Association show 
    annual exports of the water of life were worth 
    £4.3 billion last year. In volume terms, 
    overseas sales rose by 2.5 per cent to 
    the equivalent of 1.23 billion bottles. 
    Overall, the spirit accounts for about 85 per cent of Scottish food 
    and drink exports and nearly a quarter of the UK total.
Scotch whisky distilleries currently source 80 per cent of the 
    barley used in malting from growers north of the Border, but 
    industry experts predict a continuing rise in demand for the 
    world-famous tipple. They say it is vital to act now to safeguard 
    future supplies of the grain and maximise the industry’s 
    potential.
