Scientists baffled by star that sparked speculation about 
    intelligent aliens

A star so strange it has sparked speculation about intelligent 
    aliens is proving even more baffling to scientists.
Last year astronomers discovered that the star known as KIC 
    8462852 in the constellation Cygnus was sporadically dimming in a 
    way that could not easily be explained.
Theories have ranged from an unusually large group of comets 
    orbiting the star to a megastructure built by super-advanced 
    aliens.
Now a new study from the Carnegie Institution in Washington DC, 
    US, has deepened the mystery.
Further analysis of observations by the Kepler space telescope 
    show that as well as displaying rapid brightness changes, the star 
    has faded slowly and steadily over a period of four years.
Stars can appear dim if solid objects such as planets or dust 
    clouds pass in front of them, but the erratic pattern shown by KIC 
    8462852 is unlike anything seen before.
When scientists conducted a detailed investigation of the steady 
    fading data they were amazed to find that the star had dimmed by 2% 
    in just six months while being watched by Kepler.
Astronomer Dr Ben Montet said: "The steady 
    brightness change in KIC 8462852 is pretty astounding. Our highly 
    accurate measurements over four years demonstrate that the star 
    really is getting fainter with time. It is unprecedented for this 
    type of star to slowly fade for years, and we don't see 
    anything else like it in the Kepler data."
The Carnegie team believe the best explanation for the sudden 
    dimming might be a collision or breakup of a planet or comet in the 
    star's system, creating a short-term cloud of dust and 
    debris.
However this would not account for the longer-term dimming 
    observed during the first three years of the Kepler observations 
    and also suggested by measurements dating back to the 19th 
    century.
The research has been accepted for publication by The 
    Astrophysical Journal.
