Scots trial to test mindfulness for diabetes 
    patients
 Both 
    Type 1 and type 2 diabetes are on the increase in 
    Scotland
It’s the meditation technique inspired by Buddhism 
    that has gone down a storm with high-fliers.
Now Scottish scientists will explore whether mindfulness can 
    help patients to control their Type 1 diabetes as part of a new 
    two-year study.
Type 1 diabetes occurs when the body is unable to produce 
    insulin to regulate blood sugar levels, and it is not linked to 
    lifestyle factors or weight.
Managing the condition involves a constant balancing act for 
    patients to level out their blood sugar using insulin injections, 
    careful diet and exercise.
There are over 276,000 people living with diabetes in Scotland, 
    and the condition can lead to blindness, amputations, kidney 
    failure and stroke if not managed correctly.
More than 75 per cent of type 1 patients in Scotland have 
    struggled to manage their condition, according to recent analysis 
    by Diabetes Scotland.
A team led by Aberdeen University plans to see whether 
    practising in mindfulness leads to lower blood glucose levels and 
    reductions in anxiety and depression that many diabetes patients 
    experience.
Lead investigator Dr Andy Keen, a health psychologist 
    specialising in diabetes at Aberdeen University and NHS Grampian, 
    said: “Both these conditions have characteristics that make 
    managing diabetes even harder.
“For example, people who are anxious have high levels of 
    stress hormones such as adrenalin and cortisol, and these cause 
    glucose to be released into the bloodstream, driving up blood 
    glucose levels.
“Also, depression is characterised by fatigue and low 
    motivation, which can make it tricky to devote the time and energy 
    required to manage complex long-term conditions like 
    diabetes.”
A specially designed mindfulness-based cognitive therapy course 
    led by psychologists from NHS Grampian has been shown to reduce 
    anxiety and depression symptoms in people with diabetes during 
    informal testing.
Mindfulness incorporates aspects of meditation, breathing and 
    yoga, and has been recommended as a treatment for people with 
    depression in England.
Google even employs a head of mindfulness training to help 
    stressed-out employees.
Dr Keen said: “It is best to think of mindfulness as a 
    skill. It is a way of helping people be better able to focus on the 
    ‘here and now’ of their lives, and disengage with unhelpful ways of 
    thinking, such as worry and rumination.
“If you change the way people think, then you change the 
    way they feel. We definitely know that anxiety and depression can 
    be significant barriers to effectively managing diabetes, and by 
    alleviating these we can give people the opportunity to invest more 
    time and energy into looking after themselves if they want to do 
    that.”
The two-year pilot will examine how mindfulness impacts on 
    adults with Type 1 diabetes with 
    high blood glucose levels, which could lay the groundwork for a 
    larger-scale study.
Participants will attend a mindfulness group one evening a week 
    for eight weeks, and practice mindfulness at home.
