Climate threat to world heritage sites
 Photograph Historic Scotland 
Orkney's late Neolithic settlement of Skara Brae is one of 
    the world's most famous heritage sites threatened by climate 
    change, an important report has warned.
They range from the Statue of Liberty to Venice and the 
    Galapagos Islands, which helped Charles Darwin form his theory of 
    evolution.
But the 5.000 year old Skara Brae, the best-preserved Stone Age 
    dwelling complex in Western Europe, is the most high profile site 
    at risk of eventual loss due coastal erosion, the study has 
    found.
It comes from the Union of Concerned Scientists (UCS), UN 
    heritage body Unesco and the United Nations Environment Programme 
    (UNEP).
It looked at 31 natural and cultural World Heritage sites in 29 
    countries that are vulnerable to increasing temperatures, melting 
    glaciers, rising seas, more intense weather, worsening droughts and 
    longer wildfire season. At Stonehenge, warmer winters are likely to 
    boost populations of burrowing animals that could disturb 
    archaeological deposits and destabilise stonework. While that 
    famous Wiltshire monument along with Avebury and Silbury Hill face 
    increased rainfall and flash floods. 
But more severe problems threaten the Heart of Neolithic Orkney 
    World Heritage site, where many archaeological sites are on the 
    coast due to the importance of the sea in Stone Age life. At least 
    half are under threat from coastal erosion, not least Skara 
    Brae.
It is on the southern shore of Sandwick and was inhabited by 
    people between 3200 and 2200 BC. Seven of their houses, connected 
    by low covered passageways, have survived. They have stone 
    dressers, beds and seats.
An eighth building may have been used as a workshop as fragments 
    of antler and bone were found in it. The village was revealed by a 
    winter storm in 1850.
An eighth building may have been used as a workshop as fragments 
    of antler and bone were found in it.
Lead author of the report and deputy director of the climate and 
    energy programme at UCS, Adam Markham, said: "Orkney and the 
    whole of Scotland is the poster child for eroding archaeology 
    sites. There are thousands of them and many of them are being lost 
    to coastal erosion and storms.
"If sea level rise and storms get worse because of 
    global warming then we are going to be losing huge amounts of 
    British heritage directly into the sea," he warned.
Other sites around the world that are at risk from coastal 
    erosion include Easter Island, with its famous head statues, many 
    of which are situated close to the sea, he said.
Elsewhere sites which bring in important tourism revenue could 
    be particularly badly hit, such as Uganda's Bwindi 
    Impenetrable National Park where rising temperatures could affect 
    the habitat of endangered mountain gorillas.
Mr Markham said: "The report is representative of 
    the kind of threats these iconic places are experiencing, some are 
    in direct and immediate danger.
"At every one of these sites we can see the impacts 
    of climate change already. Not in every place is it threatening it 
    yet but it will threaten it in the future."
New York's Statue of Liberty was badly hit by Hurricane 
    Sandy, with £68 million given for repairs and protection to the 
    area, while more intense hurricanes are expected with climate 
    change and sea level rises likely to cause more significant storm 
    surges.
Venice, with its extraordinary Byzantine, gothic, renaissance 
    and baroque architecture, is under immediate threat from rising sea 
    levels and work to protect it from flooding has cost £4 billion, 
    the report said.
Mechtild Rossler, director of Unesco's World Heritage 
    Centre, said: "Globally, we need to better understand, 
    monitor and address climate change threats to World Heritage 
    sites.
"As the report's findings underscore, achieving 
    the Paris Agreement's goal of limiting global temperature rise 
    to a level well below 2C is vitally important to protecting our 
    world heritage for current and future generations."
