Farming in harmony with wildlife
Intensive production methods have skewed agriculture’s 
    connection with nature and that must be reversed, says Edward 
    Baxter
The Land Reform Review Group’s proposals for radical change in 
    the ownership of land in Scotland published at the end of May this 
    year are of no small consequence. Two years in the gestation and 
    fraught with much politicking, their report included a proposal for 
    the absolute right to buy for some agricultural tenants, those few 
    thousand individuals holding secure ’91 Act tenancies.
The upshot of this proposal will be an argument about the 
    capital value of agricultural land when capital values are the 
    least of Scottish agriculture’s problems. It is income – or rather 
    the lack of it – where the true problem lies and which is having 
    damaging long-term consequences for our land and our 
    environment.
Before the Act of Union in 1707 Scotland had faced a series of 
    devastating famines, with wet summers and low temperatures 
    crippling agricultural production. In the 300 years since, 
    technology has driven a remarkable transformation in agriculture. 
    Where once a single seed sown produced four, today the ratio is 
    about 1:60 for wheat, barley and oats, the staple crops of modern 
    cereal farming. Improved genetics have transformed poultry, pig and 
    dairy sectors too, so food is now remarkably cheap and famine in 
    Scotland a very distant prospect. Globalisation means that we 
    expect a bewildering array of foodstuffs to be available all year 
    round and at a fraction of the cost faced by our forebears.
Greater prosperity and a growing population in the early 19th 
    century prompted investment in farms, steadings, cottages and (now 
    very valuable) farmhouses. The world-wide technological change 
    since has driven sweeping changes in the structure of farming 
    businesses in Scotland. Tractors, an innovation in the 1920s, are 
    now computer-controlled and satellite-guided behemoths. Combines 
    capable of harvesting 200-300 tonnes of cereals in a day are 
    commonplace and all operate across old farm boundaries.
The result is that the industry has shed labour – and farmers – 
    and specialisation is now the order of the day. Where once a 
    traditional lowland farm (like mine) would have had a wide range of 
    crops and enterprises under a single management, today that is 
    increasingly rare. If you see potatoes, vegetables or soft fruit 
    growing in a field they will have little to do with the man in the 
    farmhouse. The farmhouse, with the exception of ’91 Act tenancies 
    where time has stood still, is probably occupied by a city commuter 
    seeking the rural idyll.
Intensification and globalisation are not all good. It used to 
    be that farming and the environment were in step, but no longer. 
    The index for farmland birds published in The State of the UK’s 
    Birds 2013 shows a continuing decline. The population of grey 
    partridges – the quintessential farmland bird – has declined by 91 
    per cent since 1970. In the partridge’s case, the widespread use of 
    herbicides has limited the availability of broadleaved weeds which 
    are the key host plants for the insects that the chicks rely on. 
    SNH’s report on Trends of Breeding Farmland Birds in Scotland 
    published last October describes stable populations of the seed 
    eaters, for example yellowhammers, which may have benefitted from 
    targeted measures, but an accelerating decline in skylarks. The 
    switch from hay, harvested from July onwards, to silage, which is 
    cut in June, is bad news for nesting corn buntings. Clearly there 
    is an urgent need for farmers to farm wildlife back into the 
    environment where they have (accidentally) farmed it out.
Increased productivity, globalisation and the concentration of 
    market power in a few hands has often pushed prices below the cost 
    of production. In many cases, even with EU subsidy – and that is 
    under threat – farmers cannot make a living from agriculture alone. 
    If their business is financially unsustainable it is most unlikely 
    that their operations will be environmentally sustainable. Farming 
    is "living off the depreciation", and 
    either the financial (machinery and buildings) or natural (soil, 
    water, carbon) capacity of farms is being run down. Because so much 
    of our food is imported the problems are masked, but the same 
    problems are likely to be common around the world. We are importing 
    others’ natural capital as well as their food and globally the 
    long-term sustainability of agriculture must be in question. For 
    the future, society’s demands from agriculture will play a large 
    part in the shape of farming operations.
Increasingly land is expected to deliver "ecosystem 
    services" as well as food, but these are not easy to 
    measure or value. We recognise them: clean water, fresh air, 
    birdsong… but haven’t as yet found a mechanism for paying farmers 
    for delivering them. How we reward farmers for accruing natural 
    capital (which is of benefit to us all) when it is not in the price 
    of food is the great challenge of the 21st Century. A spat over 
    tenure and capital values is an unnecessary distraction.
