The art of style
Original art creates impact but how do you choose pieces that 
    will work in your home ... and can you afford it? By interior 
    designer Lisa McLaughlin
CHOOSING art for your home can be daunting and many 
    clients ask for my guidance in this important step of accessorising 
    their homes.
My advice is: choose with your heart rather 
    that your head. If you find a piece 
    that you absolutely love - and can afford it - buy it.
I often come across pieces I must have when I am not seriously 
    looking; however I tell myself that there will be a suitable place 
    somewhere ... even if I have to move the photos of the kids or take 
    down the kitchen clock to make space. I have learned the hard way 
    with too many regrets of not buying when I saw something that 
    really appealed.
It takes years to build up a collection of interesting art and 
    you need to be patient otherwise expensive mistakes will be 
    made.
When I am designing show homes, I select pieces that co-ordinate 
    with the interior. However, when it comes to your own home you can 
    be a bit more adventurous and select art that is a complete 
    contrast or choose something that will surprise or shock. This is 
    your home so find something that will reflect your personality, 
    whether it is a £5 find at a car boot sale or an interesting piece 
    whose price tag will curtail your social life for the next 12 
    months.
So where do you find interesting art? Independent galleries are 
    the most obvious choice to start with. Subscribe to the mailing 
    list and you will be updated with information on new exhibitions 
    and artists. There are certain areas where there are a number of 
    galleries quite close together so do your research and organise a 
    route that will allow you to visit the galleries you are interested 
    in. Make it a day trip with a good pub lunch to keep up your energy 
    for trailing around the galleries.
Look in local interior design and gift shops. In Ollaberry, 
    Clarkston, we show a selection of original paintings by local 
    artists as well as a collection of affordable prints.
Auctions
Auctions are also great places to pick up original artwork by 
    established artists, but it can take time to find what you are 
    looking for. I recommend checking the online catalogues in advance 
    to see what is on offer. Often you can preview the sale the day 
    before so even if you can't make it to the auction you could 
    do a telephone or written bid. However, I think that bidding in 
    person is much more fun.
Degree shows
Art school degree shows are another enjoyable way to pick up 
    bargains from new up-and-coming artists and designers. Around 
    May-June each year, the doors open to the public and the buildings 
    are turned into huge gallery spaces celebrating the work of 
    artists, designers, filmmakers and architects. Even if you 
    don't find something for your wall, you may come home with a 
    piece of jewellery or something for your coffee table from the 
    ceramics department. I find it an inspiring day out even if I come 
    home empty-handed.
Festivals
The nine-day Pittenweem Arts Festival, which runs until the end 
    of today, is a celebration of the visual arts, and hosts more than 
    100 exhibitions including local and internationally known artists. 
    You can meet the artists and craftmakers in galleries, homes, 
    studios and public venues throughout the historic village and all 
    within walking distance. Keep up to date with other art festivals 
    at visitscotland.com
Framing
Once you have selected your artwork, choose your frames 
    carefully: they can make or break a piece of art. In general, less 
    is more: you do not want the frame to be the feature with your eyes 
    drawn to that rather than the painting. Personally I find silver 
    and gold frames a bit distracting and think flat-coloured frames 
    usually complement the artwork better.
Tips
- If you are looking for a piece to fill a particular wall, take 
    a photo of the area and the dimensions of the space. Even a picture 
    that looks big in the gallery could be lost on the wall when you 
    take it home.
- An easy, low-cost way to update your artwork is to paint the 
    existing frame. I helped one of my clients select a colour that 
    co-ordinated with their paintings, and it transformed the 
    old-fashioned gilt frames. This will save you the cost of reframing 
    and works well with wooden or painted frames.
- Rotate your artwork every couple of years. It will bring a new 
    dimension to your interior and it can be surprising how well pieces 
    look in other rooms. The last time I did this it took an entire day 
    and we had to fill the walls where old fittings were and touch up 
    with paint - a bit of a hassle but worth it.
- The Own Art scheme, which is available in over 250 galleries, 
    makes buying art affordable by letting you spread the cost of your 
    purchase over 10 months with an interest-free loan. The loans can 
    be used for the purchase of any contemporary art or craft from 
    paintings and drawings to sculpture and ceramics and you can borrow 
    from as little as £100 to £2500. www.ownart.org.uk
Lisa McLaughlin, Ollaberry, 146 Busby Road, Clarkston, G76 
    8BH.www.ollaberry.com
