Day-by-day approach could be the key to quitting for good 

" GIVING up is easy , " my father used to quip " Why , I 've done it dozens of times . " 
" Your father hardly smokes at all these days , " said my mother to me , one time when I was home from Aberdeen . 
" Oh he always takes a long time getting the paper on a Sunday – I expect he stands there shooting the breeze with everyone outside the shop . " 
A couple of times , towards the end of his life , I went with him . 
" We 'll just pop into the Star after we pick up the papers ; I need to have a word with Sandy Duff about the football pavilion . " 
" Your usual ? " and Sandy would put the glass up to the optic , " and a double for Jamie too ? " As the glasses were placed on the ( very fine ) wooden bar and the water jug passed over , there would be the unmistakable clang , flint spark , and mighty flame of my father 's venerable Zippo lighter . 
" Ahh ... " that special infusion of nicotine and Glenmorangie was my father 's personal sacrament for the Sabbath Day – a sacrament that , had he but known it , was indeed taking him closer to his maker . The last time we went to the Star together , it was a matter of mere weeks . You get over death ; but being human , you never quite do . A whisper of sadness stays . 
I first gave up , properly that is , when my friend Tom did . I mean if he could – sometimes smoking two fags at the same time , so astonishing was his intake – that it had to be easy . 
Day one was sort of okay , day two fairly hellish , and by day three I had the hairy green caterpillars crawling up my veins . So I had a wee Café Crème cigar . " Ahh ... " And the rest , as real smokers know , was history . Two cigars , six cigars , a whole tin ; and then , because cigars do n't taste that nice and make you cough , you 're back on the fags again . Square one . 
" Now you do n't really smoke , do you ? " 
" You have virtually stopped , have n't you ? " My mother would in due course inquire of her eldest son . 
I would dodge the question , or use a form of words that was n't exactly a lie , but still served to convince my mother that I was being a good boy . This was clearly an ability I had inherited from my father . 
" Absolutely shocking ! " fumed my mother as she read the newspaper one day when I was in Holyrood . What had she been reading ? It was an article about the continually rising price of the new Scottish Parliament building . 
" And after all you said ! " 
What ? 
Above the article was a photograph of the top bods in charge of building the Parliament . They were coming out of a crisis meeting – and in the background , standing on George IV Bridge , you could quite clearly see me – smoking a cigarette . But when the big five oh came along , I did decide that this time I was going to have a proper stab at it . By the Grace of God , this time I succeeded . 
What worked for me , on my umpteenth attempt , was the day by day approach , but this time , crucially , combined with a self-reward system . 
You near the end of day one – and the reward is going to be ? Let me think ... 
A really nice bottle of claret ! I went to bed tiddly , but at least , praise be , I had n't succumbed . 
Day two – hmm ? A decent bottle of white burgundy ! " I hope this is n't going to turn you into an alcoholic " commented my wife . So on day three we went to the movies ( where you ca n't smoke anyway ) . 
Day four a DVD and a box of chocolates ; day five – some more of that claret ; and day six , why it 's almost a week – and maybe I am starting to taste things better . . . 
Then it 's a fortnight . Then it 's a month . And so on . Each milestone marked by that special self-reward . When it came to a year I went to Gordon Brown 's art gallery in Tain . 
" Let me see – 365 days at 20 fags a day – that comes to ... Why , I can easily afford to buy it ! " 
So we became the proud owner of an Allan MacDonald oil painting of snow clouds . Every time I look at it – I think of clouds – of smoke . it was n't easy . 
Even today it would be dangerous to take things for granted . 
" One small cigar – after all these years , I am sure I could control it . " 
No . I simply dare n't . 
But the point is , it can be done . And take it from me , quitting is worth it . Really . 
