High trails offer Highland mountain biking 
    thrills

WINTER might not seem like the most logical time to open a new 
    mountain bike centre with trails that climb to nearly 600m above 
    sea level in the Highlands.
But unveiling the eagerly-anticipated routes on the Glenlivet 
    Estate at the end of autumn in November hasn’t affected the 
    popularity of the new venture.
The newly-built trails, a combination of wonderfully engineered 
    singletrack, a few short fire-track sections and some scintillating 
    features, cover an area that 
    includes Carn Meilich, Tom a’Chor and Carn Diamh to the north of 
    Tomintoul.
It means there’s not only some great riding to be had, but 
    you’ll also get some glorious views – if you can take your eyes off 
    the trail ahead.
I’m no expert when it comes to trail centre riding – I’m usually 
    more of a cross-country mountain biker – so when I headed to 
    Glenlivet I stuck to the easier blue route, a five-and-a-half-mile 
    circuit of Carn Meilich which was great fun without anything 
    technical to stop me in my tracks.
There’s a fair amount of uphill riding but I guess that’s to be 
    expected on this terrain – and it certainly makes up for it with 
    some fantastic flowing sections through the forest.
The red and blue routes start off at the same point, heading up 
    a lovely twisting ascent to the Gauger’s Lookout viewpoint before 
    entering the woods on some nice singletrack that tucks this way and 
    that between tree trunks before a bumpy ride through Ankers 
    Alley.
A couple of bermed corners are great fun and then the two routes 
    split – the red dipping down to the right at a fork and the blue 
    continuing to the left.
I paused here and considered trying out the red but, aware my 
    technical skills aren’t up to much, decided to stick to Plan A and 
    stayed on the blue. I was in the minority today, though the blue 
    route is popular and is even okay for children to enjoy, if they’ve 
    got the legs for a few hills.
A bit of a climb on forestry roads and a short section of 
    singletrack follows before the final singletrack stage round the 
    top of Carn Meilich and home to the trailhead through The Barrel 
    Run. This was an exhilarating flowing downhill for me, now feeling 
    confident enough to tackle it at a decent pace, and it was over all 
    too soon. The joy of trail centres like this, however, is that you 
    can just do it all again.

The more difficult red route, which incorporates a number of 
    avoidable black grade features, continues from the split to more or 
    less the summit of Carn Diamh, a spectacular panoramic viewpoint 
    overlooking the Cairngorms.
There’s a “Wee Reed” for those wanting to dip their feet in the 
    water – maybe next time for me – and another shortcut option before 
    the final ascent. But most prefer to tackle the full 14 miles of 
    full-on thrills which end with the same Barrel Run as the blue 
    route.
I might wait a while before attempting that one but, having had 
    a taste of what to expect on this initial visit to the new trail 
    centre, I’m eager to boost my skills and take to the trails 
    more.
The centre is a great addition to the outdoor opportunities in 
    the Cairngorms National Park and, judging by its active Facebook 
    page, is attracting plenty of people to the area and the estate, 
    which already boasts a number of waymarked cycle trails and 
    walks.
Once winter is out of the way, the Glenlivet mountain bike 
    trails are only going to get busier, and that can only be a good 
    thing for this particular corner of the Cairngorms.
