Herbs in winter Knowing each plant's particular needs 
    is the key to survival
Understanding how different herbs work gives you the 
    best chance of getting them through the winter.
Most north European herbs, such as mint, simply die back and 
    re-emerge the following spring. Though more tender, thymes can sit 
    out cold winters, but the likes of bay need help to do so. Needless 
    to say, sub-tropical basil has no chance and must be treated as an 
    annual here.
Lovage and tarragon protect themselves against icy winters by 
    discarding leaf and stem. As days shorten, the plants are triggered 
    into shutting down. The foliage decays, leaving the roots intact, 
    so all we have to do is clear away the vegetation and wait for 
    spring.
During the summer, my hops use lovage's majestic 
    three-metre stems as a climbing frame, so tidying up a mess of 
    tangly hop vines and rotten lovage isn't as easy as it could 
    be. I go a step further in the mint bed by wielding the strimmer to 
    flatten the remaining woody mint stumps and discouraging pernicious 
    weeds.
Ground elder insidiously weaves its way between the herb roots, 
    so can't be dug out. With some northern toughies, you can 
    extend the season by two or three weeks by digging up and potting a 
    clump of your favourite mint or chives. Although the timing of 
    dormancy is largely controlled by day length, temperature also 
    plays a part. The greater warmth of the greenhouse or a kitchen 
    sill tricks the herbs into continuing a little longer. But you will 
    find they have much less flavour than usual, so you might want to 
    use precious greenhouse space for more needy specimens.
Some tender herbs, such as rosemary and bay, must be squeezed 
    into the greenhouse. They might survive a mild winter, but I'm 
    not prepared to take the risk. My bay tree is so large it takes 
    some moving, so a few years ago I left it against a south-facing 
    wall for the winter to be left with half the shrub in spring. 
    Lesson learned.
Other woody Mediterranean plants - such as thyme and winter 
    savory - can cope outdoors in the open ground, provided the soil is 
    very free-draining. They grow naturally in gritty Mediterranean 
    hillsides so won't tolerate soggy soils. But you must be more 
    careful when growing them in containers. Apart from a thin icy 
    topcoat in the depths of winter, soil temperature rarely drops 
    below 5C between December and 
    February. But the compost in a pot quickly gains or loses heat 
    through its wall: it could easily become rock hard. To prevent 
    this, group containers together and run a thick layer of bubblewrap 
    round them.
Bubblewrap becomes 
    indispensible at this time of year. Instead of digging up 
    sorrel and moving a clump to the greenhouse, the simplest way of 
    enjoying its tangy, lemony flavour a bit longer is to stick a 
    cloche over a plant. Or use two or three large twigs to support 
    some fleece. You might also get away with a final sowing of salad 
    rocket under a cloche. You'd need to sow thickly as 
    germination rates are getting very low now, but salad rocket should 
    appear within a week and you can start cutting when it's 
    7cm-8cm tall. You would get better results in a greenhouse or 
    polytunnel, though.
As I said last week, I'm all for tidiness in much of the 
    garden, but some herbs should be spared the strimmer. Because the 
    large umbels of dill and fennel provide shelter for countless 
    insects, they're a magnet for blue tits and chiffchaffs. Enjoy 
    the antics of these tiny birds clambering among the flower heads 
    while you're also cutting back on your feed bill.
