10 things to do across Scotland this weekend 
1 Perthshire Amber Festival 
Across Perthshire , from tomorrow 

This 10-day Scottish , folk and world music festival founded by singer songwriter Dougie MacLean is back for a ninth year across Perthshire from tomorrow . The festival hub is in Dunkeld , with concerts also scheduled in venues ranging from Perth Concert Hall to the replica iron age Crannog on Loch Tay near Kenmure . Performers include award winning songwriter Karine Polwart , Capercaillie 's Karen Matheson and Dundee collective Anderson , McGinty , Webster , Ward and Fisher . Spin-off strand Amber Discoveries offers a range of activities including walks , talks , workshops and music sessions . 
www.perthshireamber.com 
2 Hobby Crafts / Crafts For Christmas 
SECC , Glasgow , Today to Sunday 
Get inspired and indulge in some early Christmas shopping with these two crafty consumer shows running side by side at Glasgow 's SECC until Sunday . Hobby Crafts focuses on stitching and creative crafts such as jewellery making , beading , and papercraft and features a host of exhibitors and suppliers plus workshops , talks and demonstrations from craft experts and industry professionals . Crafts for Christmas offers a wide selection of handmade goods , festive food and drink , plus gift wrapping and live music . A single ticket giving access to both shows costs £ 7.50 - £ 8.50 . 
www.hobbycraftshows.co.uk/glasgow 
Robot 
Our Dynamic Earth , Edinburgh , until Sunday 
A final chance to catch this one-off exhibition of androids from film and TV . Promising an absorbing insight into on-screen artificial intelligence from the dawn of cinema onwards , there are around 30 model robots to see , covering Fritz Lang 's silent classic Metropolis ( released in 1927 ) right up to recent blockbuster Iron Man . Also featured are characters from The Terminator , Star Wars and Red Dwarf . Admission is included with standard entry ( £ 7.50 - £ 11.50 ) , which also covers the venue 's vast collection of interactive exhibits on geology , evolution , science , and space . 
www.dynamicearth.co.uk 
4 Scottish Country House in Action 
Pollok House , Glasgow , until October 31 
It 's also the last full week of Pollok House 's Edwardian-themed history event , taking visitors back to how the property was from 1901-11 . Aiming to give the flavour of a real-life Downton Abbey , expert volunteers will don period costumes to answer questions on the history of the house while in character . Pollok House , run by the National Trust for Scotland , boasts lavish family rooms full of period furnishings and huge servants ' quarters , along with one of the UK 's finest collections of Spanish art . Tickets are £ 5 - £ 6.50 . 
www.nts.org.uk/Property/Pollok-House 
5 Literary Dundee 
Bonar Hall , Dundee , Today to Sunday 
Dragon 's Den star Duncan Bannatyne , Olympic gold-winning rower Katherine Grainger , crime writers William McIlvanney and Denise Mina , and award-winning novelists Jenni Fagan and Sarah Hall are among the guests at Dundee 's autumn book festival . Centred on the University of Dundee 's Bonar Hall , there are 40 events covering poetry , crime , sport , business , comics , fiction and non-fiction . There are also creative writing workshops , events for children , and the announcement of the winner of the Dundee International Book Prize , worth £ 10,000 and a book deal . 
www.dundee.ac.uk/literarydundee 
6 Scottish Cycling National Track Championships 
Sir Chris Hoy Velodrome , Glasgow , Sunday 
An early chance to catch some of the stars of next year 's Commonwealth Games in the venue hosting Glasgow 2014 's track cycling . Following three days of mainly sprint and time trial events earlier this month , the fourth and final day of the Scottish Track Cycling Championships will feature endurance riders competing in Kilo , 2K Pursuit , 3K Pursuit and 4K Pursuit events . Day tickets are £ 10 ( £ 3 concession ) , which can be purchased from Glasgow Royal Concert Hall , or by calling 0141 353 8000 . 
www.britishcycling.org.uk/scotland 
7 Scone Palace Spooky Hallowe'en Weekend 
Scone Palace , Perth , Saturday and Sunday 
Hallowe'en is n't until next Thursday , but there are plenty of spooky goings-on this weekend to keep fright fans going . Scone Palace is one of many historical attractions getting in on the action early with two days of family-friendly activities . As well as shows from Alba Puppet Crew , there 's a spooky bat trail , apple dooking , creepy pottery sessions , and a Hallowe'en treasure hunt . Author Geoff Holder also gives illustrated talks on 18th-century bodysnatching . A standard £ 4.20 - £ 6 ticket gives access to most of the programme , although extra charges apply for some activities . 
www.scone-palace.co.uk 
8 Scary Style Weekend 
Edinburgh Dungeon , Friday and Saturday 
The capital 's historical horror attraction is also running a series of events to celebrate Hallowe'en this weekend , with a £ 6-off discount offered to anyone turning up in a spooky costume , and late-night opening on Friday and Saturday . Along with all of the usual spine-tingling stuff , there 's a new show called Dinner for the Dead exploring the origins of Hallowe'en with ethereal tales from ancient times , mystic predictions and terrifying visits from spirits . 
www.thedungeons.com/edinburgh 
9 Fright Night 
Linlithgow Palace , Friday and Saturday 
Elsewhere , the magnificently sited renaissance-era ruin of Linlithgow Palace provides the perfect backdrop for this atmospheric after-dark tour . Brought to life by costumed performers , the event showcases some of the palace 's less wholesome former occupants , alongside some of the most gruesome happenings in Scotland 's past – from the outbreak of the plague to witch trials . Not recommended for young children , tours run at 7.30 pm , 8.30 pm and 9.30 pm on Friday and Saturday this week and next , with tickets available for £ 10 . 
www.historic-scotland.gov.uk/index/places/events.htm 
10 Hallowe'en Drive-In Movies 
M&Ds , Motherwell , Friday to Sunday 
This week 's hair-raising round-up concludes with this authentic US-style drive-in experience at Motherwell 's M&Ds A weekend of Hallowe'en-themed screenings kicks off at 8 pm tomorrow night with supernatural thriller Mama . Teen-friendly franchise-closer Twilight Breaking Dawn Part 2 is in the corresponding slot on Saturday , while U-rated Adam Sandler animation Hotel Transylvania offers a family option on Sunday from 6 pm . Midnight screenings pitched at older fans include Insidious ( Friday ) and Sinister ( Saturday ) , with Josh Whedon 's acclaimed genre mash-up The Cabin In The Woods at 10 pm on Sunday . Single car tickets are priced from £ 24 . 
www.scotlandsthemepark.com/halloween_2013 
