Paula McGuire on trying every Glasgow 2014 sport

by PAULA MCGUIRE
TWO years ago, self-confessed couch potato Paula 
    McGuire decided to try every sport in the Commonwealth Games and 
    blog about her experiences. Read on for tales of tears and 
    triumphs
A little under two years ago, I had no tale to tell. Then I 
    changed my life, and a tale wasn’t far behind. Three: apparently 
    it’s a magic number. Luck, stooges and dimensions keep its company; 
    even the blind mice bandied together in a mischievous trio to 
    terrorise the farmer’s wife.
And not so long ago, three was also my lucky number. Mine, and 
    pretty much everyone else’s. Not exactly imaginative, right? But, 
    between one and five was just about the extent of my life’s limits 
    at that point. Three is refined, it’s safe, it’s a cultural 
    stalwart; and I clung to three like fat to my arteries. By the time 
    I hit 30, I’d been on the fence so long I was bleeding creosote.
My twenties were misspent dodging conversation, running from 
    opportunity, and ducking out of social situations. It all sounds 
    vaguely energetic but, in fact, I reached my fourth decade having 
    avoided all forms of physical activity, up to and including jumping 
    for joy. Then in August 2012 everything in my battened-down little 
    life somehow just changed, including that overworked lucky 
    number.
I’m not talking a major life event or near-death experience. 
    There was no moment of clarity, yet, by the time the month was out, 
    I was knee-high in exercise, with only exercise and knee-highs for 
    company. In my infinite stupidity, I had decided to overturn my 
    lifelong idleness by trying sport. Not a sport: sport.
Trying all 17 Commonwealth disciplines before Glasgow 2014 is my 
    game; Paula Must Try Harder is my name. When I say I was the least 
    sporty person in the history of sport and people, I’m not being 
    unduly boastful. I’d never accidentally thrown a ball or sneaked a 
    run in before adolescence. During a school PE career in which I was 
    asked to rake the sand for an entire athletics term as my long jump 
    fell spectacularly short, my biggest sporting achievement was 
    managing an inadvertent somersault on a rain-soaked hockey pitch. 
    Health and Safety scuppered my game before I’d hit a ball. So when 
    I decided not just to leave my comfort zone but to contract a 
    lawyer and serve it with divorce papers, knowing where to start was 
    the least, but the most pressing, of my worries.
Cycling, I finally conceded, was to be my first trial. Given 
    that saddles are typically one-man operations, I figured I would 
    only be letting myself down if I failed to stay atop, and I’d long 
    become accustomed to my own shortcomings. Mastering the skills, 
    though, was still a commute away, as it took me almost as long to 
    approach the only local adult cycling instructor as it did to learn 
    to ride. On three consecutive days, I paced around outside the 
    gates, trying desperately to convince myself that those inside 
    wouldn’t laugh me right back out, and picking the softest spot for 
    my landing, in case they did.
Of course, I wasn’t rejected, I was welcomed, and soon – though 
    probably not as soon as you would expect – I had two feet on the 
    pedals and was wobbling off towards cycling proficiency. Practice, 
    so I’m told, makes perfect; but for me it also made for frustration 
    and a fair amount of injury. While nearby kids threw their 
    stabilisers into the long grass, I trundled on for more than a 
    month of unsuccessful lessons, during which my instructor even 
    removed my pedals as they were hindering my progress.
It was demoralising, of course it was, but when it worked – and 
    it finally did work – heavens to Hoy, did it feel good. That 
    glorious moment, as limbs and bike found their rhythm, was enough 
    to convince this reluctant trier that she was on the right path, 
    even if she kept falling off it.
Black and blue of leg but light of heart, I set off for the next 
    sport, and the next. Badminton, lawn bowls, squash – I tried each 
    with the gusto of an encouraged idiot. Then came wrestling and 
    table tennis and even a marathon relay. Every one more buoying than 
    the last. Some were easier than others. Boxing was a definite 
    other. As I threw what I thought was a punch, laughter erupted and 
    I was likened to a puppet whose puny arms were on strings. The 
    gentle ways of judo were more my speed, as Olympian Euan Burton 
    taught me to pin and throw opponents onto the welcoming mats below. 
    I can’t say I was any good, mainly because I wasn’t, but at least I 
    enjoyed a nice rest every time I was defeated
As the sports bowed to my determination, my home-grown project 
    somehow developed into something bigger than myself. It sprouted 
    arms and legs much more athletic than my own and pointed more 
    confidently than I ever could to its achievements – to my 
    achievements. Clubs and athletes suddenly hopped on board, and soon 
    I was lifting weights (OK, I was lifting the bar that would 
    normally hold weights) with Olympic and Commonwealth weightlifters, 
    bowling with Team Scotland members, and powering around the Sir 
    Chris Hoy Velodrome with, well, completely on my own because no-one 
    had the nerve to share the track with such a clumsy beginner.
Overwhelmed by the support of people who actually know a thing 
    or three about sport, I finally felt confident enough to take on 
    some scary team events. Suddenly I was throwing balls at nets and 
    knocking hockey sticks with opponents. And while I was the runt of 
    the litter at every match, no-one ever made me feel as such, and 
    somehow it really didn’t matter a jot anyway.
Sure, there were setbacks – like the day my badminton lesson was 
    interrupted by a troupe of boisterous youngsters and teenage Paula 
    resurfaced in a terrified panic, to send me crying off the court. 
    But when the tears dried and my embarrassment subsided, I realised 
    something that has kept me motivated until this very day. When 
    things go well, it’s great; when things go badly, it’s a great 
    story. And who wants a life without great stories?
One of the more terrifying elements of my challenge came in the 
    form of a triathlon. To exercise-fearing me, it felt like the Games 
    had sneaked three sports into one. And while I could at least point 
    a bike in the right direction by then, and knew that I could crawl 
    the running section if necessary, I was yet to tackle my biggest 
    hurdle – lifelong aquaphobia – to learn to swim.
It’s not a mystery why I’m panicked by bodies of water deeper 
    than a sparrow’s sample. I still carry the scars of being badly 
    scalded as a toddler, after which water, boiling or otherwise, 
    became my enemy. So it was never going to be easy to jump into a 
    pool alongside proper athletes and attempt 16 lengths of front 
    crawl. Phobia sessions, a glut of swimming lessons and several 
    tear-stained costumes later, though, and I was flailing through the 
    water, determined only to do my best and have the most fun 
    possible. I’m probably the only triathlete ever to have competed 
    using a bright pink float, but the reaction I received for my 
    efforts was spectacular. It proved that sometimes being the worst 
    is just as important as being the best – and it’s a lot more 
    entertaining!
Crossing that final timing mat to the cheers – and tears – of my 
    loved ones was like nothing I had ever experienced. Pride, relief 
    and a hint of mania flooded my body, masking the fatigue using, I 
    imagine, the same chemical mechanism that helps women forget the 
    pain of labour. Afterwards, my attitude had changed; I had changed. 
    If I could complete a triathlon with a fear of water, 
    underdeveloped cycling skills and the running gait of a walrus, I 
    could do anything. And somehow life doesn’t seem so difficult 
    now.
I’ve broken bones instead of records, developed bruises not 
    muscles, but I’ve also shot clays with comedians, trained in an 
    Olympian’s judo gi, and inspired a presentation by the Prince of 
    Malaysia on the power of sport. More than that, though, I’ve left 
    behind 30 years in the shadows to finally become my own light 
    source. And things look so much brighter.
With only one sport left – rugby sevens! – I’m as happy as a pig 
    in a blanket. But that doesn’t mean I’m leaving behind my challenge 
    when Glasgow 2014 arrives, and that’s as much through necessity as 
    choice. Life and challenge aren’t exactly distinguishable one from 
    the other these days, and trying new things on behalf of those who 
    aren’t quite ready to is everything I never imagined it would be: 
    liberating, interesting, me!
Nowadays, my life is no longer limits and safety and three. My 
    life is bold, it’s adventurous, it’s... 17. Not only my new lucky 
    number or my upcoming sports tally, 17 has become my philosophy, my 
    inspiration and my mindset. And I’m determined to share its 
    benefits, to show fellow violets they need shrink no longer. So if, 
    like me, you’ve always thought of yourself as not the kind of 
    person who does, prove yourself wrong, go out and just do. Ditch 
    the three, hang up the hang-ups, and join the 17 revolution.
Keep up to date with all Paula’s sporting endeavours at 
    paulamusttryharder.co.uk or follow her on Twitter 
    @pmusttryharder
