Extend the shelf life of home-grown veg 

Hopefully , you are harvesting good yields of crops from the work you have put in this season . 
However , the problem some of you might now face is how to best store the produce you have so you can use it for as long as possible . 
It is heartbreaking to put all that effort in only to see your harvest rot before you have a chance to eat it all . 
But fear not , as I have some handy tips on how you can extend the shelf life of your crops . 
Unless the ground is needed for other crops , most root vegetables on well-drained soil can be left there over winter . 
However , this does leave them vulnerable to cold damage and hungry slugs , and is not recommended in wet soils . 
Root vegetables can also be stored in a " clamp " – essentially a pile of mud and straw – which is an ingenious method of keeping these crops cold and just moist enough to extend their life . 
Start by choosing a bit of the garden or plot where rainwater does n't tend to collect . 
Dig a small pit and line it with a thick layer of straw . Fluff the straw up to trap air which will help insulate the crops . 
Next , pile your vegetables on top of the straw . You can store carrots , beetroot , potatoes , turnips , parsnips and other root crops in this way . 
Place a layer of straw about eight inches thick on top before covering the mound in earth . 
Remember to leave a tuft of straw exposed at the top of the mound to provide ventilation which will stop your crops from getting too wet and rotting . 
Remove what you need as and when it 's required , and rebuild the clamp each time . 
You can also store root vegetables in a container covered in a thick layer of sand . 
For potatoes , make sure they 're completely covered in sand to stop the light getting to them . 
Potatoes exposed to light will turn green which makes them poisonous . 
Cauliflower can be dug up with its root to make it last longer . Wrap the root in newspaper and store the whole plant in a cool , dark place . 
And a handy way to keep Brussels sprouts for longer is to cut off the whole stem with the sprouts attached . 
Place the bottom of the stem in a container of water , almost like keeping flowers in a vase . 
Asparagus can also be left to stand up with the bottom of the stems in a container of water . 
Just keep them in a cool place too to make them last longer . 
Lettuce and salad leaves can be stored well once chopped up . 
Wash the leaves before chopping them . 
Put the chopped leaves into a clean glass jar and seal , and they should stay fresh for about five days . 
Chilli peppers can be stored unwashed and wrapped in paper towels in the fridge . 
They should keep for up to three weeks this way . 
Failing that , you can remove the seeds , chop them up and store them in airtight bags in the freezer . 
Tomatoes are always a tricky crop to store , though . 
Try putting them in a container , like an ice-cream tub . 
Put a piece of kitchen roll onto the bottom of the container and place the tomatoes on top of it . 
Then put another piece of kitchen roll on top of the tomatoes and lay the lid of the container diagonally across the top of the box at an angle . This will allow more ventilation . 
There 's a wealth of information on storing veg out there . 
Rachel Cole , who works for seed company D. T. Brown , has compiled a booklet with a huge array of tips and advice on keeping fruit and vegetables as fresh as possible for as long as possible . 
The publication is a result of Rachel 's own investigations into the subject and is one of the most comprehensive guides on the subject I have seen . 
The newly-published 20-page booklet entitled " Keep it Fresh " , is included free of charge with all seed orders made to D. T. Brown . 
To request a copy of the latest D. T. Brown catalogue , you can call 0845 371 0532 or visit the wesbite www.dtbrownseeds.co.uk 
