10 top tips for home lighting 

I can make a room calmer , brighter , or simply better to do your make-up in , so this week we explain why it 's so important to get your lighting 
just right . 
Lighting should be thought of at three levels in a room – the floor , walls and ceiling . 
Plan your scheme in advance . If you 're having electrical work done , make sure the sockets are fitted where you want your table and floor lamps to be . Wall lights and target lighting should also be planned at this stage . 
Lighting can be much more creative , and useful , than just an overhead light in each room . In the bedrooms , do you want wall lights over the beds for reading , or just bedside lamps ? 
Do n't forget wall lights in the bathroom , perhaps for creating a relaxing atmosphere when you 're soaking in the tub , and on either side of the mirror for shaving and applying make-up . An illuminated mirror is another option . 
Target lighting , such as over-counter lights in kitchens , can be both practical and attractive . 
Consider how the room will be used and at what time of day . This has an influence on whether the lighting should be overhead , localised for reading , or purely for atmosphere . 
Lighting should be considered in relation to the use of the room and the times that good light will be most needed . 
If you want to focus attention on a feature , light it up . This is often best achieved with a low-level lighting scheme , where walls are ' washed ' with light , or where an area is accented with spotlights . Statement pieces , such as chandeliers , can be a stunning feature , but give them room to ' breathe ' . Think of lighting as a means of adding personality and atmosphere to a room and home . 
Table lamps can be beautiful objects in their own right , not just used to provide light , and shades can be chosen to echo other colours in the room . 
In a room with a high ceiling , think carefully about the height and size of the ceiling light – a small one may look silly . Most plastic ceiling roses come with short flexes , but you can buy longer one so the light is n't ' stranded ' too close to the ceiling . A longer flex will make it look more in proportion to the room and therefore create more of a feature , especially with a large light fitting or shade . 
