Route of a great adventure
IT HAS an air of Middle Earth about it, as if it might 
    be populated by troubled hobbits and battling elves.
The Ring of Breadalbane is, in fact, a bus route. But it is not, 
    as our five-year-old points out in admiration, just like any old 
    ordinary bus.
Instead, the Ring of Breadalbane Explorer takes you on a journey 
    through some of Scotland's most beautiful scenery. The 
    circular route takes in Crieff, Comrie, Kenmore, Aberfeldy and all 
    the sparkling lochs, magnificent 
    mountains, pretty villages and rushing waterfalls in between.
Set up two years ago by the Breadalbane Tourism Co-operative, 
    formed by 12 like-minded businesses keen to boost tourism and 
    support the community, it's the only initiative of its kind in 
    Scotland.
Project manager Thomas McMonigle explains: 
    "Transport is an issue for business in rural areas so 
    we got together and decided to do something about it. As far as we 
    are aware, this is the only public bus service which is part-funded 
    by the private sector. We have had a fantastic response, lots of 
    positive feedback, and passenger numbers are growing. Around 55% of 
    passengers are visitors to the area, and according to our last 
    survey, around 80% of those who used the bus said they would not 
    have otherwise made the trip, which is really 
    encouraging."
Teresa Milsom, who manages the Royal Hotel in Comrie, says the 
    Explorer is having an impact on visitor numbers at the hotel, 
    particularly from locals who come to enjoy a meal or night out and 
    visitors who, having driven to the area, want to take a break from 
    the car for the weekend. "People are very positive 
    about the service, it is making a difference," she 
    explains.
The Royal Hotel is one of a number of hotels, guest houses, 
    B&Bs and self-catering accommodation along the route. Look out 
    for Highland Heather Lodges in Comrie, The Four Seasons Hotel, 
    Killin Hotel and the Ben Lawers Hotel in Lawers Village. A bit of 
    planning is required if you intend to use the service as a 
    'hop on, hop off'. Once you disembark, you have roughly 
    three hours before the next one so use your time and plan your 
    stops accordingly.
Breadalbane means 'the high ground of Scotland', which 
    is appropriate given it is home to the mountain, Ben Lawers, the 
    highest in Scotland outwith the Nevis and Cairngorm ranges.
Comrie is the starting point for our day trip, and we are at the 
    stop bright and early in the autumn sunshine. It is a beautiful 
    place, with a pretty bridge over the River Earn and distinctive 
    White Church, now a community centre, at its heart. On our short 
    walk to the bus stop, we pass a whitewashed shop which was designed 
    by Charles Rennie Mackintosh.
We're heading clockwise, but a short distance outside 
    Comrie on the anti-clockwise route lies Comrie Croft, an 
    award-winning green destination which is home to a farmstead 
    hostel, campsite, walking trails, wildlife viewing and 
    mountain-biking.
Seems a shame to leave this village with its friendly people but 
    the bus is here, and we're off. The road takes us into St 
    Fillans and alongside Loch Earn, where the boys spot mysterious, 
    reflective figures rising from the 
    loch. "Are they statues? Or magic 
    people?" asks Harry. "They are ghosts 
    coming out of the water," offers his big brother, 
    Archie, helpfully. This will probably come back to haunt us at 
    bedtime.
They are in fact an art installation by Rob Mulholland, 
    commissioned by Andrew Low, owner of the Four Seasons Hotel, and 
    refer to homecoming and returning (they stand beside the pier) and 
    the natural cycle of the seasons which are reflected in the figures 
    themselves.
Our first stop is Killin, where we marvel at the rushing Falls 
    of Dochart and enjoy lunch at the Bridge of Lochay Hotel.
The difficulty lies in choosing where to go, as there is so much 
    to see and do. The Scottish Crannog Centre, near Acharn, a 
    reconstruction of an early Iron Age 
    loch dwelling, is a must for history-lovers, while 
    Karelia House near Kenmore is a crafters' paradise. A trip 
    into the hills with Highland Safaris reveals a whole other side to 
    the landscape while Dewar's World of Whisky in Aberfeldy is a 
    brilliant, interactive insight into the ancient art of distilling, 
    complete with trivia, games and 
    audio-visual presentations.
Our journey ends in Aberfeldy where we admire the town's 
    art deco cinema, the Birks, and enjoy coffee and a browse in the 
    Watermill bookshop before catching the bus via Crieff to Comrie.
No hobbits, but plenty of adventures.
