Art review : Mackintosh Architecture , Glasgow 

by DUNCAN MACMILLAN 
EXQUISITE drawings and plans show the ceaseless curiosity and creative genius of Charles Rennie Mackintosh 
MACKINTOSH ARCHITECTURE 
Hunterian Art Gallery & Museum , Glasgow 
Star rating : **** 
When the architect of the new Scottish Parliament was chosen , the powers that be clearly thought that Enric Miralles , an " international " architect , would never produce a building that might encourage the foolish thought that with its parliament restored Scotland might once again think itself a nation . But Miralles was a Catalan and the Catalans have long recognised their parallel with the Scots . He also actually knew Scotland and its architecture very well and , in tribute , he based his whole design on a Charles Rennie Mackintosh flower drawing . Its stem grows out of the ground at the foot of Arthur 's Seat and its leaves and petals are the striking curves of the building 's plan . He also paid tribute , however , to the great Catalan architect , Antoni Gaudí . The sloping columns supporting the walls of the debating chamber come straight from Gaudí 's Sagrada Familia in Barcelona . Gaudi is the national architect of Catalonia and so clearly Miralles implied Mackintosh is Scotland 's national architect . Far from getting a neutral , international building , the bureaucrats and politicians got one that is twice national : Scottish and Catalan . 
There is a delightful irony in that , but it is also interesting that Miralles links Gaudí and Mackintosh . Before the 20th century appropriated Modernism with a capital M as its own , the idea that art should be of its time , learn from the past , but not imitate it , and therefore be " modern " , had wide currency . In architecture it was a reaction against Victorian , eclectic revivalism . This idea of modernity inspired both Gaudí and Mackintosh and is the source of the striking originality of their architecture . ( It is incidentally a nice model for our parliament too . ) 
Mackintosh Architecture , a display of architectural drawings at the Hunterian , offers a fresh insight into the work of our national architect , if indeed that is what he is . His drawings are often very beautiful , but here it is the professional architect we see in them and so , instead of the familiar image of a romantic young man with dark hair , full moustache and floppy tie , he is represented by Fra Newbery 's portrait . He is hatless and wearing an overcoat . He has no moustache , his hair is grey and he has grown a little plump . Newbery catches the alert intelligence in his face and with the plans of Glasgow School of Art in his hand , he is presented as a successful , established architect . There was a sad irony in that , however , for although he is now Glasgow 's principal cultural icon , in his lifetime the city rejected him . He left Glasgow in 1913 after the completion of the School of Art and built very little thereafter . 
The portrait declares the intention of the exhibition to avoid the myth and focus on the work , not the man . The result is often surprising . In 1893 , for instance , while he was making the fantastical designs that earned him and his friends the sobriquet the Spook School , as an apprentice in the office of Honeyman and Keppie he was designing an ash pit for two tenements formerly in Carrick Street , Glasgow and adding lavatories to each floor of their stair towers . 
Honeyman and Keppie were good , professional architects . Their work was eclectic and they were happy to build in whatever style their client preferred . By the time Mackintosh joined the practice , Honeyman , the senior partner was doing less and less and as a gifted apprentice Mackintosh was evidently given an independent hand early on , but he naturally worked as they did . In 1901 , for instance , he designed an extension to Aytoun House in Glasgow pretty much in the Italian Renaissance style of the original building . It may seem surprising nevertheless to find him writing to a client in 1905 , " If you want a house in the Tudor , or any other phase of English architecture , I can provide you with my best services . " His own sense of style was ultimately irrepressible , however . It is there in the detail of the Glasgow Herald building from 1894 , for instance , but his imagination is even more strikingly apparent in the dramatic perspective drawing that he did for this project . The partnership also designed the Daily Record building in 1901 . Here Mackintosh seems to have had a fairly free hand , but the impact of the design is also immeasurably enhanced by his spectacular perspective drawing . 
Recognising the dramatic impression such drawings made , the partners evidently encouraged Mackintosh to prepare competition drawings . One striking example is a proposal for Liverpool Cathedral made in 1901 or '02 . In outline it is a conventional gothic church , but closer to , especially in the tracery of the windows , he has let his imagination run wild . If it had been built , we might more readily see the analogy that Miralles suggested between him and Gaudí . The one church he did build , Queen 's Cross Church , does show some of this richness of detail , although it too is conventional in outline . In his dealings with the Glasgow Schools Board for the two schools that he designed , Mackintosh 's imagination proved to be an obstacle rather than an asset , however . His proposal in 1904 for what would in effect have been a glass wall as an improvement for his earlier design of Scotland Street School was rejected with some acrimony . 
Already in 1901 , no doubt in prospect of his marriage to Margaret Macdonald , Mackintosh designed a town and a country house for an artist and in these , working independently of the partnership , his characteristic style is fully evolved . The windows are asymmetrically placed and vary dramatically in size . The profiles of the walls slope inwards avoiding the rectilinear discipline of conventional architecture . These features are even more pronounced in his two major houses built in the following years , Windyhill and The Hill House . In them he looked to the massive walls , simple lines and asymmetrical compositions of Scottish castles and tower houses , but transformed them into something radically modern . 
In 1906 , he became a partner in the firm and for the next seven years was able to work more independently leading to his masterpiece , Glasgow School of Art . Here too , Scottish traditional forms were an important part of his inspiration . He also looked much more widely at the architecture of the past , however , and the exhibition of his architectural drawings is supported by a display of his sketches . This reveals how far he travelled in search of inspiration , but also what sort of buildings he favoured and how indeed he studied them to learn from them – not to imitate them as his Victorian predecessors would have done , but to create from them a modern style . The buildings he draws are often barns , cottages and country churches , strangers to the conventional architectural disciplines of symmetry and the perpendicular . He spent a long time studying the castle on Holy Island , for instance ( before it was restored by Edward Lutyens ) . Its irregular massing , eccentric windows and battered ( sloping ) walls perhaps find an echo in some of his most characteristic later designs . The timber construction of a barn in Norfolk suggests the open timber roof of the gallery in the School of Art and indeed the barn 's brick ventilation windows offer a model for his signature chequerboard motif . A church in Dorset proves to be the model for the tower of Queen 's Cross Church . 
These drawings are beautiful , but they are also a vital witness to Mackintosh 's insatiable curiosity and to the way his imagination worked , studying not just the shapes of buildings but the details of how they functioned . One remarkable drawing , for instance , is of the kitchen of a cobbler 's cottage on Holy Island analysing how the kitchen range worked and itemising the functions of its parts . This is indeed the work of Mackintosh the dedicated professional , just as Fra Newbery , artist and director of the Glasgow School of Art , saw him . 
Until 4 January 2015 
