How to make the most of your Isa allowance
Financial planner Bill Saunders gives advice on how to 
    optimise your Isa allowance
TAILOR IT TO YOUR NEEDS
Short-term volatility should not be of concern, so long as you 
    have the discipline to keep your nerve during market turbulence. 
    Equities will always outperform cash in the long run. Equally, if 
    you are younger and looking to save for a shorter-term goal, such 
    as a deposit for your first home, a cash individual savings account 
    (Isa) would be more appropriate.
DRIP-FEED YOUR INVESTMENTS
From 1 July, you can invest £15,000 tax-free a year into an Isa 
    – a sizeable lump sum to invest in the markets. While you could be 
    lucky, there is the risk that you could be investing just before a 
    fall. Instead, consider using your allowance to invest up to £1,250 
    a month. In this way, even if the market does go down in the months 
    following the initial investment, you will be buying more units at 
    a cheaper price, which will benefit you when prices recover.
BE AN EARLY BIRD
Isas are 15 years old tomorrow and investors who regularly put 
    money to work on the first day of the new tax year, rather than the 
    last, are typically better off by £6,519. Analysis by Hargreaves 
    Lansdown shows that if an investor had put their full Isa allowance 
    into the FTSE All-Share from the outset of each tax year since 6 
    April 1999 they would now have £172,955, compared to £166,796 for a 
    last minute Isa investor.
USE NEW OPTIONS WISELY
Currently it’s possible to switch cash Isas to stocks and shares 
    Isas but you can’t transfer money the other way. That will change 
    from 1 July, however. The new ability to switch freely from shares 
    to cash could be an ideal way for older investors to lock in gains 
    made on the stock market and reduce risk as retirement approaches. 
    Conversely, if you have built up cash Isas over the years, it may 
    be a good time to switch a proportion to stocks and shares, 
    especially since interest rates are low.
SHOP AROUND
If you are looking for a cash Isa, shop around for a competitive 
    rate. But be wary of fixed-term plans, which may offer an 
    attractive headline rate but tie you in for a number of years. With 
    interest rates only likely to rise in the years ahead, better 
    returns may be on offer a year or two from now.
Bill Saunders is a certified financial planner and head of 
    financial planning at Acumen Financial Planning
