Gardening : Can you compost weeds ? 
We all know that home-made compost improves the soil and gives all our plants the nutrients for strong , healthy growth . 
Most , but not all , of our garden clearings can be composted , but it never fails to amaze me that some people do n't compost weeds . And there 's the thorny question of blighty tattie shaws , or foliage , and other diseased plants . 
How you deal with weeds and diseased plants partly depends on the temperature of your compost bin . Composting goes through two stages . During the first two or three months , the compost heap should be hot enough to bake an egg . This is followed by a slow , cool period when the rough compost is converted into fine , fertile soil . The higher the temperature during the early stages , the more you can compost . Seeds and pathogens are killed off by very high early temperatures . 
You 'll achieve greater heat when you place a compost bin in a sunny spot , put in a good mix of different materials and pray for a fine , hot summer . And the larger the volume of material , the higher the temperature . There 's also no doubt that fresh grass clippings do more to boost the overall temperature than anything else . If you do n't believe me , just watch the steam rising from a pile of grass or try touching the heap . I do feel sorry for people who want to make good compost but have done away with the lawn . 
Weeds are a fact of life . Short of mulching the entire garden , we ca n't prevent them . And even if we poison the soil by constantly drenching it with weedkiller , weeds will still appear . We ca n't do anything about the soil 's rich seed bank or stop weed seeds blowing in from neighbouring gardens . So , you 'll get weeds , regardless of what is in the compost . 
Obsessively tidy gardeners who get rid of weeds by hoeing or digging them out before flowering can safely compost the offending foliage and avoid weedy compost . But if , like me , you let the groundsel flower , you 're doomed . Most seeds survive the composting process unless a bin temperature is higher than 62 C for 30 days . Plastic compost bins rarely get warmer than 35 C , and even larger wooden boxes struggle to maintain a temperature of 60 C over a long period . 
The roots of perennials , like docks and ground elder , work differently to seeds . They die if denied light for two years , so they should be killed off when you use a wooden New Zealand box and harvest the compost after two years . If you take compost from a plastic unit every year , you may need to throw back any roots that are obviously still alive . Another year will kill them . 
Alternatively , drown the roots in a large plastic bucket . They 'll be slimy and dead after a few weeks so can safely be added to the compost . Throw the nutritious liquid from the bucket into the compost bin or use it as a liquid feed . Have a relaxed attitude to weeds ; they are plants , after all . 
Dealing with diseased plants is quite different . Like seeds , pathogens are only killed by higher temperatures than domestic compost bins usually achieve . Experiments at Wageningen Agricultural University , Netherlands , in 1992 showed the oospores of potato blight , Phytophthora infestans , were only killed when temperatures were higher than 40 C for 48 hours . Astonishingly , they survived temperatures down to -80 C . 
So , if you have a large wooden compost bin , you may be able to compost blighty shaws . My large plastic bays work between 58 and 62 C in the summer . For extra heat , I cover the diseased foliage with a good layer of fresh grass clippings . But if you 're in any doubt and think your bin is n't hot enough , stuff the shaws in your green bin . As a general rule , it 's always best to dispose of diseased plants and not compost them . 
