Youngsters' audition chance

Auditions and workshops by Youth Music Theatre UK (YMT) come to 
    Inverness on Monday in a search for the best actors, singers, 
    dancers, musicians and back stage crew to join their company in 
    2014.
Ed Sheeran, who worked as a youngster with YMT and is now the 
    organisation's patron, said: “With YMT I experienced 
    the buzz of being on stage – and realised how much I love 
    performing. I say go and audition – you don’t know where it could 
    take you!”
And Inverness YMT member Ellen MacAskill said about the 
    experience: “Youth Music Theatre lets you spend two weeks 
    doing what you love with interesting, inventive and like-minded 
    people. And if you don't get into a production at first - 
    persist! I promise it's worth it.”
As part of auditions beind held 
    in 24 UK cities, YMT comes to Inverness for Monday's visit 
    with sessions running at the Spectrum Centre next to the bus 
    station in Farraline Square from 10.30am-13.15pm and from 
    20-4.45pm.
Hopeful young performers, aged 11-21, can book their place for 
    the workshop and audition tour online at 
    www.youthmusictheatreuk.org/auditions
Youth Music Theatre UK is a national music theatre company for 
    young people aged 11-21, offering training and mentoring and a 
    proven way for young people to enter the creative industries – 
    whether as a performer, musician, stagehand or administrator.
Successful auditionees will work with some of the UK’s leading 
    professional directors, composers and choreographers to stage 
    full-scale productions at some of the country’s most respected 
    theatres and arts festivals.
They’ll get the chance to learn new skills, make friends and 
    take their first steps in a career in the performing arts. Those 
    taking part in YMT musicals will be awarded with Trinity College’s 
    Grade 8 certificates in musical theatre!
YMT graduates have gone on to make their mark in the performing 
    arts – in West End musicals, on TV and even in Hollywood 
    blockbusters. Recent graduates include Ed Sheeran, The 
    King’s Speech star Freya Wilson, Sam Smith, whose number 
    one single with Naughty Boy, La La La, is one of 
    the biggest selling songs of the year, Fresh Meat’s Charlotte 
    Ritchie and pop stars Jetta and Tich.
YMT's 2008 show Loserville recently 
    played in the West End, starring Eastenders’ 
    Aaron Sidwell and Lil Chris and was nominated for an Olivier Award 
    for best new musical.
Productions for 2014 will include the world premiere of 
    Ali and Nino, based on Terry Pratchett's 
    best-selling novel, Soul Music at the Rose 
    Theatre in Kingston, an actor/musician production of 
    Macbeth at the Lyric Theatre Belfast and Lindsay 
    Kemp’s Variété at the Edinburgh Fringe 
    Festival.
Auditions take the form of a musical theatre workshop with a two 
    and a half hour session of dance/drama/singing workshops led by a 
    professional director, choreographer and musical director.
YMT want to emphasise that the audition's definitely not 
    the scary kind seen on TV talent shows. The team will lead a series 
    of practical and fun activities to help make the most of the 
    auditionee's time and to allow them to show the team exactly 
    what their skills are.
The audition team includes Matilda and 
    Top Hat associate director Luke Sheppard, 
    Southwark Playhouse director Ellie Jones, musical directors Paul 
    Herbert and Professor Derek Barnes and choreographers Vicki 
    Manderson (National Theatre of Scotland and Curious 
    Incident…) and Yael Loewenstein (English Touring Opera, 
    Young Vic).
After all the auditions have taken place, YMT will announce the 
    performers chosen for one of eight new productions they’ll be 
    putting on across the UK. Around 250 young people are selected and 
    everyone will hear before the end of March 2014.
