Recipes : Scottish dishes with Gallic precision 

SEASONAL ingredients , beautifully cooked is the mantra for Craig Sandle , executive chef at the Galvin Brasserie de Luxe 
Ever since the Beatles met Maharishi Mahesh Yogi in 1967 , everyone wants to have their own mantra . Ours happens to be " harmony in the kitchen and seasonal ingredients perfectly cooked " . 
We are meticulous with the produce we select and with the techniques that allow us to achieve exceptional flavour . 
In the early 19th century , Britain was dominated by French cooking , under great chefs such as Marie-Antoine Carême and Georges Auguste Escoffier , based in the great hotels of the day such as the Ritz and the Savoy in London . At such institutions rules were hard and fast and transgressed at your peril . 
Today we can be more relaxed and are free to be creative and enterprisingly modern ; we can adapt and adopt the best of the available produce from our own island as well as importing the finest Gallic offerings . 
The great legacy handed down from those far-off days is a vast array of precision techniques that we can employ in today 's kitchens and the knowledge of the intrinsic link between food , wine and joie de vivre . 
In recent years there has been a resurgence of interest in both the classic French brasserie and the bistro . 
This to me is unsurprising and a wonderful sign that people can appreciate the outstanding flavour that can be attained through a series of processes which , once learned , are relatively simple to apply . 
SHOPPING LIST 
STARTER 
1 tsp honey 
1 tsp Dijon mustard 
25 ml balsamic vinegar 
75 ml olive oil 
sea salt and freshly ground white pepper 
2 heads of red endive 
1 radicchio 
1 radicchio di Treviso ( or any seasonal leaf ) 
2 x 125 g balls of unpasteurised buffalo mozzarella , each cut into 6 slices 
2 tbsp extra virgin olive oil 
8 very thin slices of speck or Parma ham 
2 blood oranges , peeled and divided into segments ( or regular oranges ) 
2 tbsp pomegranate seeds 
12 sprigs of chervil 
MAIN COURSE 
90 g softened unsalted butter 
80 g curly parsley , chopped 
100 g fresh white breadcrumbs 
2 guinea fowl crowns or 2 small free-range chickens 
2 tsp vegetable oil 
½ garlic clove 
50 ml white wine 
1 sprig of thyme 
300 ml brown chicken stock 
sea salt and freshly ground white pepper 
½ lemon 
3 tbsp olive oil 
quantity of herb gnocchi 
40 small fresh morel mushrooms or any seasonal mushroom 
160 g shelled broad beans , blanched and thin outer skin removed 
DESSERT 
120 g puff pastry 
110 g softened salted butter 
130 g caster sugar 
7 Braeburn apples , peeled , halved and cored 
120 ml crème fraîche 
40 g icing sugar 
1½ tbsp Calvados 
ENDIVE SALAD WITH MOZZARELLA , BLOOD ORANGES AND SPECK 
This makes a great starter or snack and takes mere minutes to put together . 
Serves 4 
1 To make the dressing , mix the honey , mustard and balsamic vinegar together , then gradually whisk in the 75 ml of olive oil . Season with a pinch of salt and pepper . 
2 Cut the bottom off the endive and radicchio and separate the leaves . Lightly toss them with a little of the dressing . 
3 Drizzle the mozzarella with the 2 tbsp of extra virgin olive oil and season with salt and pepper . 
4 Make a small bed of leaves on each serving plate , lay a slice of speck on top , then three slices of mozzarella and add a few orange segments . 
5 Curl the remaining slice of speck on top and scatter the pomegranate seeds over the salad . 
6 Garnish with the chervil sprigs and finish by drizzling a tablespoon of dressing on to the plate . 
SUPREME OF GUINEA FOWL WITH BROAD BEANS , MUSHROOMS AND HERB GNOCCHI 
I urge you to try making your own gnocchi . It really does taste much better than shop-bought . 
Serves 4 
1 To make the herb paste , put the butter , parsley and breadcrumbs in a food processor and blitz until they combine . Transfer to a piping bag . 
2 Prepare the guinea fowl by removing the wishbone and wings ( these are used in the sauce later ) , then push your fingers between the skin and breast to loosen . Pipe the herb paste into this cavity and spread it out evenly . 
3 Heat the vegetable oil in a large , ovenproof frying pan until smoking hot . Seal the guinea fowl on both breasts until golden brown . Transfer the pan to an oven preheated to 200 C / Gas Mark 6 and cook for 25 minutes , basting regularly . 
4 Remove from the oven and rest for 15 minutes , then remove the breasts from the crowns and keep warm . 
5 To make the sauce , chop the wing bones into very small pieces . Heat a heavy-based saucepan ( big enough to hold the bones in a single layer ) until it 's very hot . Add the chopped bones to the pan with the garlic and reduce the heat slightly . Cook for 30 minutes , stirring occasionally , ensuring the pan is hot enough to roast but not burn the bones . They should turn a deep golden yellow colour . 
6 Add the white wine and thyme and cook until the mixture is reduced by three-quarters . Add the chicken stock and cook for 10-15 minutes or until it 's reduced to a light coating consistency . Season with salt , if necessary , and finish with a few drops of lemon juice . Pass the sauce through a fine sieve . 
7 Just before serving , heat 1 tablespoon of olive oil in a frying pan and sauté the gnocchi for 2-3 minutes or until golden all over . Season with salt and pepper and keep warm . 
8 Heat another tablespoon of olive oil in a small saucepan and sauté the morels gently for 2-3 minutes or until tender . Season with a little salt . 
9 At the same time , reheat the broad beans in a pan of boiling salted water . Drain , then sauté the beans in the remaining olive oil for 30 seconds and season with salt . 
10 To serve , slice each guinea fowl breast into three and place in the centre of each serving plate . Surround with the gnocchi , morels and broad beans . Spoon over a little sauce and serve immediately . 
TARTE TATIN WITH CRÈME NORMANDE 
A true French classic . Its origin is n't 100 per cent clear , but I like the idea of the apple pie that went wrong , made by the Tatin sisters at Hotel Tatin , just south of Paris . 
Serves 4 
1 Roll out the puff pastry on a lightly floured surface to a 21 cm round . Prick all over with a fork and rest in the fridge for 40 minutes . 
2 Spread the butter over the bottom of a 20 cm tarte Tatin mould or an ovenproof , non-stick frying pan . 
3 Sprinkle the caster sugar over the mould in an even layer , then arrange the apple halves over the sugar , standing them on their sides , with two halves in the middle . 
4 Lay the pastry round over the apples , tucking the edges down the side . 
5 Place the mould or pan over a medium heat on the hob for about ten minutes or until the sugar starts to caramelise . 
6 Transfer to an oven preheated to 160 C / Gas Mark 3 and bake for 90 minutes . 
7 For the crème Normande , mix the crème fraîche , icing sugar and Calvados in a bowl , then cover with cling film and refrigerate for one hour . 
8 Remove the tart from the oven and leave to cool for at least 30 minutes . Invert it on to a chopping board and cut into four portions . 
9 Serve with a generous spoonful of crème Normande . 
Edinburgh-born Craig Sandle is executive chef at Galvin Brasserie de Luxe ( galvinbrasseriedeluxe.com ) and the Pompadour by Galvin ( thepompadourbygalvin.com ) . 
