Travel: camping in a Wigwan in West Lothian
I love the great outdoors – apart from when it rains. 
    As a confirmed fair weather camper I like to know that I can get 
    back to the ranch, fast, when the going gets tough.
So my family and I are not going far from our Edinburgh home to 
    brave the Scottish spring weather, exploring some stunning natural 
    and ancient landscapes in nearby West Lothian.
Our holiday base camp is Hilly Cow Wigwams situated on a working 
    farm near to the village of Kirknewton, only 10 miles or so from 
    the centre of the capital.
After receiving a warm welcome from owner Lesley, we have a 
    chance to explore. I confess to be expecting a basic collection of 
    sheds, but the site turns out to be more like a display of 
    luxurious giant Toblerone tubes, nestled idyllically in the 
    countryside.
Thankfully, our home from home is relatively near the communal 
    kitchen and shower block, but not too close to our neighbouring 
    wigwammers.
We have lucked out and secured the deluxe model, complete with 
    cheerful twinkling fairy lights decorating the interior and – the 
    best bit, as far as I’m concerned – an inside loo.
Our wigwam is named Henry after the owners’ horse, which we can 
    see grazing contentedly from our veranda. You couldn’t really get 
    much closer to nature, but happily we are still protected under a 
    roof.
After we settle in, we are given a fun, short tour of the 
    farmyard by owner Stuart. We are lucky enough to be there when 
    there are calves and lambs, and even the hens were kind enough to 
    lay some eggs for our breakfast. More extensive explorations of the 
    site are put on hold as we are heading off on a bit of a mission of 
    our own.
My elder (pre-teen) daughter is desperate to visit the bright 
    lights of the nearby shopping emporiums at Livingston Designer 
    Outlet. As the weather has taken a turn for the worse and her 
    pocket money is burning a hole in her wallet, I’m keen to have an 
    easy life and stay dry. After a thankfully successful shopping 
    expedition, we opt for a lazy takeaway dinner from a nearby pizza 
    restaurant in the village. I thought we were being really slack, 
    collecting our grub on our way past, but it turns out they often 
    deliver to the farm.
After dinner there is a games room for guests, with snooker and 
    air hockey to keep youngsters amused. We spend a surprisingly 
    comfortable night tucked up in our heated pod. After a wonderful 
    breakfast, we are all raring to go exploring further afield, 
    although it would have been all too easy to let the hay grow under 
    our feet here.
If you’re feeling creative, head to nearby Overton Farm, on the 
    outskirts of Kirknewton, where kids can try pottery painting or a 
    whole host of craft activities. You can even join in with adults’ 
    pottery courses tutored by resident potter Bernie Rowen 
    (www.potteraround.co.uk).
We make a beeline for Almondell and Calderwood Country Park. It 
    could easily take us a week to discover it all.
The mansion house was home to the Earls of Buchan from the 
    1790s, but it fell into disrepair and was demolished in 1969. 
    However, the landscaped grounds remain, and in spring and early 
    summer there are banks of wild garlic, white anemones and drifts of 
    bluebells dotted throughout the mature woodland.
After we have exhausted ourselves walking, we head back to the 
    visitor centre for an ice-cream and a scamper in the play park. 
    There are plenty of ranger activities to get involved with 
    throughout the year: bushcraft for kids, and badger-watching to 
    name just a couple. There are two other country parks, Polkemmet 
    and Beecraigs nearby, which are also well worth visiting.
Last stop on our whirlwind tour is the ancient site just outside 
    Bathgate called Cairnpapple Hill. Journeying to this place, you 
    can’t fail to appreciate that this location has always been 
    magical. The natural topography seems painted with light and 
    shadows, as clouds dance overhead. Used as a ceremonial site from 
    about 3000BC to 1400BC we can understand why, when our short uphill 
    walk is rewarded with stunning views over central Scotland, and as 
    far as Goat Fell on Arran. The highlight for the girls was 
    clambering down into the chamber inside the hill, although I was 
    more pleased to come back out.
We all survived our trip into the great outdoors, without once 
    bolting home. We hardly scraped the surface of the place, so we’ll 
    have to make time to return to this corner of wild West Lothian.
Henry’s en suite wigwam costs £50 a night based on two adults 
    sharing. Breakfast baskets, bedding, fairy lights and BBQ are 
    available at extra cost; 
    www.hillycowwigwams.co.uk
For more information on the area, see 
    www.visitwestlothian.co.uk
