Travel : Thurston Manor Leisure Park , Dunbar 

by LYNN O'ROURKE 
IT 'S the end of a long week . The kids are wiped out and we are trying to juggle work with a hectic round of school and after-school events . So the thought of chilling out in a deluxe lodge is a welcome one . 
I tell the kids and the first thing they say is : " Is it far ? Do we have to sit in the car for ages ? Is there a swimming pool ? " The " No , no and yes , " are met with cheers – from all of us . 
We throw a few things in the car late Friday afternoon , take off down the A1 and in under an hour I have a glass of prosecco in my hand while my other half has cracked open a beer and the kids are playing outside on the deck . Despite Thurston boasting a bustling leisure park , the lodges are situated down a steep country road that leads to a secluded glen surrounded by woodland with a lake at one end . It 's a striking setting and , despite its close proximity , Edinburgh seems a million miles away , which suits us fine . 
WINING AND DINING 
The three-bedroom lodge we stay in has a spacious , well-equipped kitchen in one corner of the open-plan , high-ceilinged living space . There is a dining area with a table and French windows leading directly out to a deck that wraps around two sides . On the deck is a picnic table and benches for al fresco meals , and coffee and cake in the sunshine . Although we catered for ourselves , there is a bar and restaurant close to the reception area serving breakfast , lunch and evening meals , as well as offering a takeaway service . 
BUDGET OR BOUTIQUE ? 
The lodges are situated in a boutique setting – well-maintained , peaceful , in a rural spot away from the main leisure park , although within easy reach of its facilities . 
ROOM SERVICE 
The lodge is spacious and comfortable . The high ceilings in the master bedroom ( complete with wall-mounted TV ) add to the sense of space , with a closet / dressing room leading off it through to an en-suite shower room . There are two good-sized twin bedrooms , plus a bathroom leading off the hallway to the main living space . There is an electric fire in the living room , with radiators elsewhere , making the lodge cosy even on a damp day , and a wall-mounted TV with DVD player above the fireplace . 
WORTH GETTING OUT OF BED FOR 
This is a great location with trout fishing in the on-site lake plus woodland walks on the doorstep . Close to the coast , Dunbar , North Berwick , Haddington and East Linton are all nearby . We spend one morning at the rocky fishing village of St Abbs , dipping into the friendly visitor centre with its fascinating history of early sea diving and local fishing families , as well as its gift shop , which called out to my two young daughters in much the way I imagine a mermaid 's siren call would have to sailors . We walk up the steep wooden steps that lead past quaint gardens and take in the views , imagining a hard life lived off the sea as the wind blows the cobwebs away , and enjoy plates of chips ( I blame all that sea air ) followed by tea and cream scones at a café by the small harbour , sitting outside in the bracing air . Further up the hillside , situated by the footpath to St Abbs Head , you 'll find Number Four , a contemporary art and craft gallery ( www.numberfourgallery.co.uk ) that is well worth a visit . From here we head off down winding roads to the tucked-away Coldingham Beach , which is popular with families and surfers alike , and where the kids " paddled " waist-deep before landing another haul of shells and sea glass . 
LITTLE EXTRAS 
There is a heated swimming pool , as well as a gym and sauna , plus kids ' play areas and an on-site shop . You can also book in for a massage or beauty treatment . 
GUESTBOOK COMMENTS 
The deluxe lodges offer a real escape , a rural setting close to towns and beaches with plenty to do – or not – depending on how you feel . This is the kind of place you can simply chill out in and spend some quality family time , or use as a base for exploring the scenic local area . We managed a bit of both and left feeling rested and revived . 
Thurston Manor Leisure Park , Innerwick , Dunbar , East Lothian EH42 1SA ( 01368 840643 , www.thurstonmanor.co.uk ) . There is a range of luxury caravan and lodge accommodation available for hire – short breaks this autumn start from £ 129 . For purchase , pre-owned caravans start from £ 9,995 ; new caravans start from £ 29,995 . Pre-owned lodges start from £ 49,995 ; new lodges start from £ 99,995. 
