Growing your own dahlias can be loads of fun

Dahlias provide a big splash of colour in any 
    garden.
Last week I started off the dahlias, burying the tubers in 
    shallow trays of damp compost and popping them into the propagator 
    where they should soon start to sprout.
Once the green shoots emerge I’ll cut some off and root them in 
    compost for an abundance of summer colour.
Growing dahlias in this way is very easy and creates many plants 
    from just a few pounds and it is lots more fun than simply buying 
    them fully grown.
The variety I have chosen this year is ‘Colour Spectacle’, a 
    semi-cactus type with white-edged orange flowers.
I wanted zingy colour for the pots at the front door and this 
    should provide it. Also, it has a bushy growth habit, which means 
    there will be lots of dark foliage to offset the vibrant blooms.
Dahlias can be big and brash but if you want something more 
    subtle then choose one of the single-flowered varieties that 
    produce lots of smaller flowers on tall, wiry stems.
I like these too and I may yet give 
    into temptation and start some off before the growing 
    season is over.
Meanwhile the potatoes are chitting in egg boxes on the kitchen 
    windowsill. This year I’m growing Arran Pilot and I’ll be raising 
    them in old compost sacks which have been punctured at the bottom 
    for drainage.
If you don’t have space in the garden for potatoes, then raising 
    them in very large pots or special potato bags is also an option. 
    But this year I’m trying out the compost sacks to see how well they 
    perform.
And, after potting up lots of bare-root perennials and filling 
    the huge pots for the plum trees, I’ve got lots of empty sacks to 
    use up. So as well as potatoes I’ll be using them for all sorts of 
    vegetables, from carrots to kale.
For years I’d a garden consisting of a terrace and one long, 
    narrow border and that’s when I really got into growing in 
    containers.
Now, with more space I still find myself using pots and tubs for 
    all kinds of plants. What I really like is the freedom they give me 
    to move things around and make seasonal arrangements, which is 
    something I do all the time.
I was at it again this week, pulling forward all the pots 
    containing tulips so I could watch them grow and positioning the 
    phormiums and acid yellow tones of the variegated euonymus to 
    create a fresh backdrop of foliage. Eventually all these plants, 
    including the tulips, will end up in the garden.
But the patio won’t be empty for long because for every 
    geranium, kniphofia and clematis I plant, I seem to end up growing 
    at least half a dozen more from seed, corm or cutting to take its 
    place.
Others, like the wood spurge that came from my sister’s garden, 
    don’t need to be propagated.
Instead they spread themselves around so vigorously I have to 
    restrain them. I must admit to a weakness for this as well as for 
    lady’s mantle, forget-me-nots and half a dozen other plants 
    frequently referred to as “thugs”.
They may sometimes turn up where they aren’t welcome, but they 
    fill those spaces in the garden where it’s hard to persuade 
    anything else to grow.
