Tom Kitchin : Summer tomato recipes 

by TOM KITCHIN 
TOMATOES are a wonderful ingredient . Often they 're seen as an accompaniment , the base of a sauce or an addition to a dish , but I believe you can make them the centrepiece of a meal – especially in fresh , light summer suppers . 
The secret is to get your hands on some high quality , fresh tomatoes and find a recipe that brings out their juicy , natural flavour . 
July is a brilliant time to enjoy tomatoes and heritage varieties are worth seeking out if you can . Heritage tomatoes – or heirloom tomatoes as they 're sometimes known – are grown more naturally , as they would have been in the past , hence the name . 
They lack the genetic mutation that gives modern tomatoes an appealing red colour while sacrificing the fruit 's sweet taste . They are less uniform than the perfect , flawless varieties you 'll find in supermarkets , but I think that 's what makes them all the more enjoyable and attractive on the plate . 
Heritage tomatoes come in all shapes and sizes and the joy is you can create a plate of vibrant reds , yellows , purples and greens and every bite will bring with it a lovely new burst of flavour . Most will taste a lot more beefy and flavoursome . 
What I also love about them is the shapes – small , large , round or bumpy – you 'll rarely find two exactly the same , which is the great thing about serving and eating them . 
Grown naturally , heritage tomatoes are left to soak up the summer sun , making them seriously sweet , ripe and delicious . You 'll find more than 25 varieties , and part of the fun is trying as many different types as you can , from vibrant red " sweet cherry " tomatoes to sweet , orange " sun gold " tomatoes , the smoky sweetness of " black cherry " , or the distinctive red and yellow stripes of the " tigerella " . 
To let the flavours really shine , make a heritage tomato salad , and complement it simply with some fresh herbs and oils or cheeses . Heritage tomatoes also really bring out the flavour of this season 's meats and fish . 
Right now at the restaurant we 're serving a wonderful dish on our " celebration of the season menu " – a heritage tomato salad with Newhaven lobster served with olive toast and a tomato consommé . This creates a wonderful plate which tastes like the essence of summer . 
Whether you 're planning a barbecue , a summer meal with friends or a simple , light , seasonal supper , I would certainly recommend that you bring heritage tomatoes to the forefront of your dish rather than simply letting them sit on the sidelines . 
Heritage tomato , mozzarella salad with homemade pesto Serves four 
For the pesto : 
50 g fresh basil 
1 clove of garlic – crushed 
5 tbsp quality extra virgin olive oil 
25 g quality Pecorino cheese – finely grated 
For the salad : 
8 heritage tomatoes – sliced 
50 g fresh basil leaves 
250 g mozzarella – roughly chopped 
salt and pepper for seasoning 
For the pesto , using a pestle and mortar or a blender combine the basil , garlic and extra virgin olive oil to create a paste . Stir in the finely grated cheese . For the salad , divide the tomatoes equally among four plates and place the mozzarella on top . Lightly drizzle with the pesto and olive oil , and season with salt and pepper . Garnish with the fresh basil leaves and serve . 
Summer tomato salad served with tomato consommé and tapenade Serves two to three 
The flavours of summer are undiminished in this raw salad set off by salty tapenade . You can use vegetarian Worcestershire sauce if desired . 
For the vegetable consommé : 
12 ripe tomatoes , chopped 
¼ cucumber , chopped 
splash Worcestershire sauce 
splash red wine vinegar 
salt 
2 garlic cloves 
handful basil leaves 
For the tapenade : 
1 garlic clove 
4 tbsp capers 
200 g black olives 
splash sherry vinegar 
extra virgin olive oil 
salt and freshly ground black pepper 
For the salad : 
5 tomatoes , preferably mixed colours 
3 asparagus spears , tips only 
5 radishes 
½ bulb fennel 
100 g broad beans 
small bunch baby basil 
For the vegetable consommé , season the tomatoes and cucumber with Worcestershire sauce and red wine vinegar . Blend all the ingredients together in a food processor . Place a sieve lined with a muslin cloth on top of a bowl , then pour in the vegetable consommé mixture . Bring the edges of the muslin together , tie with a piece of string and hang over the bowl . Leave for six hours to drain . Reserve the liquid consommé collected in the bowl . 
For the tapenade , blend all of the ingredients in a food processor adding just enough olive oil until it forms a paste , seasoning to taste with salt and pepper . 
For the salad , slice the tomatoes into different sized pieces . Slice the asparagus , radishes and fennel and place them in a bowl of iced water to chill . When ready to serve , drain . 
To serve , divide the tomatoes , broad beans and chilled vegetables among four small serving bowls and garnish with the tapenade and baby basil . Pour over the consommé . 
