Tom Kitchin: Baking with seasonal vegetables

by TOM KITCHIN
AS SUMMER turns to autumn, it’s a good chance to make 
    the most of the last of the season’s vegetables.
You’ll find that vegetables like carrots, courgettes and 
    courgette flowers, as well as greens like fennel, spinach and 
    watercress, are no longer at their best after September, so now’s 
    the time to enjoy them while you still can.
A great way to use up the end of the season’s vegetables is to 
    create some delicious soups, especially tasty as the weather starts 
    to cool. In our house, we also like to use them in baking. With a 
    little creativity, vegetables can make a great addition to cakes 
    and bakes, and it’s a brilliant way to make them a little 
    healthier. In fact, if you’ve got some fussy eaters in the house, 
    it’s a clever way to get your kids eating more vegetables, and 
    indeed helping with the cooking.
This summer, we’ve had a great time in the garden with the kids, 
    trying to make the most of the sun. For those of you lucky enough 
    to be able to grow your own vegetables or visit a local farm or 
    producer, the rewards can be a joy and there’s nothing better than 
    seeing the results of all that nurturing and hard work.
I can still remember the days I spent picking strawberries as a 
    teenager and then, during summer, packing broccoli on a local farm. 
    Being so close to produce like that really allows you to enjoy your 
    vegetables as fresh as can be and it’s wonderful to be able to 
    teach kids about where the produce they eat comes from.
Even a visit to a local farmers’ market gives kids a chance to 
    understand more about food and its origins. Taking the carrots and 
    courgettes home still a little misshapen and muddy from the ground 
    is all part of the journey. Getting the kids to help with the 
    peeling, grating and indeed the home baking can be so much fun, and 
    eating the baking, still warm, fresh from the oven is magical.
This carrot cake recipe was one I fell in love with when our 
    pastry chef at The Kitchin started making small petits fours for 
    our guests to enjoy after dinner. I took the recipe home and tried 
    it with our two eldest boys and ever since then it’s become a firm 
    family favourite.
Most of us will have sampled carrot cake before, but another of 
    our family favourites is this courgette cake. I first made it after 
    a visit to a local school where the pupils were growing their own 
    vegetables and making similar cakes with the courgettes they grew. 
    I’ve developed my own recipe since and it’s such a simple recipe 
    for kids to help with, yet it’s a tasty treat the whole family can 
    enjoy. Great British Bake Off – here we go!
MINI CARROT CAKES WITH CREAM CHEESE TOPPING - MAKES 
    12
a little butter for greasing
190g plain flour
1½ tsp baking powder
½ tsp bicarbonate of soda
1 tsp ground cinnamon
¾ tsp freshly grated nutmeg
95g desiccated coconut
4 medium free range eggs
135ml vegetable oil
190g soft dark brown sugar
400g peeled carrots, grated
Topping
270g cream cheese
230g icing sugar, sifted
160g unsalted butter, softened
1 vanilla pod, split and seeds scraped, or 1 tsp of vanilla 
    extract
finely chopped carrot and grated orange zest to finish
Method
Heat the oven to 180C/Gas Mark 4. Grease and line a 30cm x 20cm 
    baking tin with baking parchment. Sift the flour with the baking 
    powder, bicarbonate of soda and spices into a large bowl. Stir in 
    the desiccated coconut.
Using an electric hand whisk or electric mixer, whisk the eggs, 
    vegetable oil and brown sugar together until fluffy and thick.
Using a large metal spoon, carefully fold the flour and coconut 
    into the mixture until just combined. Finally, add the grated 
    carrots and fold in gently. Spoon the mixture into the prepared 
    tin, spreading it evenly and into the corners.
Bake for 20 to 25 minutes until a fine skewer or cocktail stick 
    inserted into the centre of the cake comes out clean. Leave the 
    cake in the tin for ten minutes, then transfer to a wire rack to 
    cool completely.
To make the topping, beat the cream cheese, icing sugar, butter 
    and vanilla seeds or extract together for at least five minutes 
    using the mixer or electric whisk, until the mixture is fluffy and 
    white.
Cut the cake into bite-size helpings and pipe a generous dollop 
    of the cream cheese mixture on top. Finish with a sprinkling of 
    finely chopped carrot and grated orange zest.
COURGETTE CAKE - SERVES EIGHT
2 eggs
120g caster sugar
1 courgette grated (8oz)
150g plain flour
2 tsp baking powder
1 tsp vanilla essence
Icing
100g butter
125g cream cheese
125g icing sugar
2 cake tins 
Method
Preheat the oven to 180C/Gas Mark 4. Beat the eggs and caster 
    sugar until light and fluffy. Slowly add the grated courgette 
    (reserving a little of the courgette for decoration), flour, baking 
    powder and vanilla essence until mixed well. Separate the mixture 
    evenly into two cake tins and bake for ten to 15 minutes. For the 
    icing, beat the butter, cream cheese and icing sugar together until 
    light and creamy. Once the cake is cool, spoon and smooth half of 
    the icing between the two cakes, and pipe the remaining icing on 
    the top. Sprinkle with finely chopped courgette. 
