How to gain from pension drawdown rules
Financial planner Kevin Garfagnini’s tips on how to 
    maximise your pension
I’m already in drawdown, what do the changes mean for 
    me?
If you’re already in drawdown, from 27 March the maximum yearly 
    income you can receive potentially increased from 120 per cent of 
    Government Actuary’s Department equivalent annuity (known as GAD) 
    to 150 per cent. However, you probably won’t benefit immediately as 
    the change only takes effect from the date of your next anniversary 
    review. For example, if your anniversary date is 1 March, 2014, you 
    won’t be able to change to the new limit until 1 March, 2015. It 
    will also depend on whether your drawdown provider has the systems 
    in place to facilitate the change.
I’m retiring soon and am considering drawdown. What do 
    I need to know?
For anyone going into drawdown for the first time, the 
    calculation of their maximum drawdown income will be based on 150 
    per cent of GAD immediately. The government has announced that it 
    plans to scrap this limit altogether from 6 April, 2015.
So, I can take my whole pension fund from next 
    April?
Yes. While it might be tempting to take the whole of your 
    pension fund as a lump sum, there are, however, tax implications. 
    While the first 25 per cent of the lump sum is tax free, the 
    remaining 75 per cent will be added to your existing income and 
    taxed at your marginal rate of income tax. This could have the 
    effect of pushing you into a higher rate band, meaning you pay more 
    tax than you expected.
Retirement still seems a long way off. How do the 
    changes affect me?
The new pension rules will provide you with greater freedom and 
    choice but also with new responsibilities. While the biggest single 
    reason for not contributing to a pension (ie: that your pension pot 
    is locked away) has been removed, the temptation will be to dip 
    into it too deeply, too soon – just because you can. Keep in mind 
    that the fundamental principles of planning for life after work 
    remain the same: Get saving; consider your income needs; think 
    about your investment risk, and don’t forget about tax.
Kevin Garfagnini is director at Mazars Financial Planning
