European train travel – helping your trip go full steam ahead 
Training to enjoy Europe – from the beauty of Brussels to the allure of Rome . 
European train travel has been a love of mine for decades . Indeed , it was writing my guidebook Europe by Train that got me into travel writing as a career all the way back in 1982 . 
Each year I still take to the tracks of several countries and delight in this environmentally-friendly , sociable and comfortable mode of travel . 
Rail passes are a great way to explore Europe if you 're thinking of visiting a large number of destinations . The best source of up-to-date information on all passes available ( and there are countless ) is to log on to raileurope.co.uk . 
There are a few things to be aware of when it comes to travelling on a rail pass . The pass will cover the ticket cost of the journey , but you may still have to pay a seat reservation fee when travelling on high-speed trains such as TGVs in France . 
If you 're planning on travelling overnight , the pass will again cover the basic ticket price , but you will need to purchase a reservation ticket for your on-board accommodation . 
The cheapest option for budget conscious travellers is usually a reclining seat , and then , depending on the train you 're travelling on , you usually have the option of four or six-berth couchettes and sometimes sleeper compartments for one two or three people . The more private the accommodation you choose , the higher the price of the ticket . 
There are limited numbers of InterRail seat reservations and passholder fares available on any given train , so if you have a set itinerary it is worth booking reservations in advance to secure your place on that train . Raileurope.co.uk is the only website in the UK which allows you to book reservations online . Some carriers choose not to participate in the InterRail scheme and if your journey involves travelling on one of these services you would need to purchase a public priced ticket in advance of travel . 
Some of the operators who have opted out of the scheme are Thalys , who operate high speed services between France , Belgium , The Netherlands and Germany , and Thello , who operate overnight services between France and Italy . 
Passholder fares are discounts on standard public fares which are available to passholders travelling on certain services . Eurostar offer a passholder fare to travellers on their routes , although it is always worth checking the public fares to see if there are any cheaper fares available before booking a passholder fare . 
The starting point for an InterRail journey is entirely down to the passholder , particularly if they are travelling from Scotland and flying into Europe . 
Some good hubs which offer a lot of options for onward travel are Paris , Brussels , Cologne , Berlin , Milan , Barcelona and Madrid . 
If you 're looking for sample InterRail itineraries the Rail Europe website has some great suggestions . If it 's a cultural overview of Europe 's highlights this type of tour might appeal and is perfectly possible : 
Begin your European adventure in Brussels and lunch on moules frites washed down with some of that notoriously potent Belgian beer . Pose for a photo at the impressive and imposing Grand Place and next to the legendary Mannequin Pis before whizzing across the border to Amsterdam , home to the impressive Van Gogh museum , criss-crossing canals and countless opportunities for bicycle rides through the colourful , cobbled streets . 
Next stop , head for Paris and delight in the French capital 's beauty before taking a day train across the border into Italy to compare and contrast the City of Light with its Eternal cousin . 
Rome is home to some of the most famous sights on the planet , with classical splendour like the Colosseum and the Pantheon , St Paul 's cathedral and the Vatican , the Trevi Fountain and the Roman Forum . From there head for Florence and Milan , two wonderful destinations . 
It 's always a wrench leaving Italy , so do it in style by taking an Elipsos Trenhotel to Barcelona . There is n't a more luxurious way to arrive in the Catalan capital than this and it gives you a nice early start to explore all those amazing Gaudi buildings and narrow alleyways that carve up the Barri Gotic . After a lot of cities , take time out to chill for a bit and head for the beach at Sitges before heading home ... 
As well as the InterRail pass , there are a range of Swiss passes available . These cover travel within Switzerland and are ideal for anyone flying in . 
The Swiss transfer card in particular could be of interest to anyone flying in from Scotland as it covers the journey from the point of arrival in Switzerland to the customer 's destination and back to the departure point . 
Any Swiss pass products include a Swiss family card , which entitles children aged under 16 to travel free of charge . Some of the other Swiss passes allow customers to travel on the many scenic trains that run throughout the country . 
To book , contact Rail Europe on 08448485848 , visit raileurope.co.uk or call into the Rail Europe Travel Centre at 193 Piccadilly , London W1J 9EU . 
